A study using over three decades of mortality data across the USA has found that death rates in people over 45 years of age peak in the winter months for both sexes, driven by cardiorespiratory diseases and injuries. The study found that the timing, magnitude and cause of deaths did not differ across climate regions or change between 1980 and 2016. The study found that mortality seasonality is largely similar across different climate regions and is unlikely to be affected by climate change. There was a lack of seasonal variation in mortality for Nordic countries compared to southern European nations. Young males experienced higher all-cause summer mortality. Older ages had persistent seasonality over a period of three decades, indicating the need for interventions targeted towards this group irrespective of geography and local climate. The study used wavelet analytical techniques to identify and characterize seasonality of total and cause-specific mortality in the USA taking into consideration age group and the cause of death.
The role of complement dysregulation in peripheral nervous system diseases, specifically sensory neuropathies, is not well understood. A study tested the hypothesis that complement activation and T-cell engagement lead to corneal nerve damage in a mouse model of ocular HSV-1 infection. Through genetic and pharmacologic targeting, the researchers discovered a central role for C3 in sensory nerve damage at the morphological and functional levels. CD4 T cells played a central role in facilitating the complement-mediated damage. The study also examined the same C3/CD4 T cell axis in a mouse model of ocular graft-versus-host disease and a T-dependent allergic eye disease model, indicating that this inflammatory neuroimmune pathology is specific to certain disease etiologies. The findings suggest the possibility for complement-targeted therapeutics to mitigate sensory neuropathies.
The variable presentation of hereditary immunodeficiencies may be influenced by genetic or environmental factors. Research with mice deficient in HOIL1, a gene involved in immune response, showed that they exhibited amylopectin-like deposits in their myocardium but minimal hyper-inflammation, and they were immunodeficient when infected with certain bacteria. These mice also showed enhanced control of chronic infections with certain pathogens, and chronic herpesvirus infections were found to complement genetic immunodeficiency in mutant mice. These findings suggest that chronic infections can modify the clinical presentations of genetic variations, which could be important in analyzing and interpreting human genotype-phenotype association studies.
Researchers used intracranial recordings to examine the dynamics of cognitive control across frontal regions in 15 epileptic patients while they resolved color-word conflict. The study found that signals emerged first in anterior cingulate cortex before dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, followed by medial frontal cortex and then by orbitofrontal cortex. The signals were observed to be dependent on task, stimulus type and exhibited adaptation over trials. The study suggests a plausible flow of signals underlying cognitive control and supports previous studies implicating the anterior cingulate cortex, medial frontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and orbitofrontal cortex in cognitive control.
Myosin 5a is a motor that transports cargo along actin filaments. Interferometric scattering microscopy was used to track the motion of the individual heads of the motor, revealing a "hand-over-hand" symmetrical walking pattern. The addition of a 20 nm gold label did not interfere with the mechano-chemical cycle of myosin 5a, and revealed a transient state with the head moving back and forth between the next actin binding site and a position just over halfway between the two binding sites. The iSCAT signal magnitude is sensitive to the label-to-surface distance, allowing for overall nanometric localization in three-dimensions. Variations in the axial distance of the motor domain with respect to the filament bound to the sample surface lead to changes in the scattering contrast. The drop in iSCAT contrast suggests that the myosin head lifts on average by 24 ± 10 nm from its actin bound position.
The latent reservoir is a major barrier to HIV cure. A method was developed that uses high-dimensional phenotyping using CyTOF to trace latently infected cells reactivated ex vivo to their original pre-activation states. Results suggest that the reservoir is not randomly distributed among cell subsets, and is remarkably conserved between individuals. However, the reservoir composition differs between tissues and blood, as do cells successfully reactivated by different latency reversing agents. By selecting 8-10 of the original CyTOF markers, highly purified populations of unstimulated in vivo latent cells were isolated. These purified populations were highly enriched for replication-competent and intact provirus, transcribed HIV, and displayed clonal expansion. The ability to isolate unstimulated latent cells from infected individuals enables previously impossible studies on HIV persistence.
Tree crickets use acoustic baffles to increase the effective loudness of their mate-attraction calls. The baffles work by isolating the front and back faces of the sound source to prevent destructive interference. While it was believed that the manufacture of objects in insects was highly stereotyped and inherited, this study shows that tree crickets are capable of optimising acoustic baffles by selecting the best sized object and modifying it appropriately for optimal efficiency. The study used finite-element modelling to quantify the acoustic efficiency of all baffles within the naturally feasible design space, and found that design significantly affects efficiency. The crickets can select the best leaf to make a near optimal baffle and modify the leaf by cutting a hole in it of acoustically optimal size. The baffles are not a stereotyped and obligate calling behaviour, as tree cricket males must decide whether to call with or without a baffle, and in the wild, large leaves that can make acoustically optimal baffles are rare, and search costs are high. However, if males have an opportunity, they will optimise the SRE of their baffles in terms of selecting the appropriate materials, i.e. the largest leaf, and then modifying it appropriately, i.e. cutting a hole of acoustically optimal size.
Inclusion body myopathy, Paget disease with frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a disease caused by mutations of the valosin-containing protein (VCP), which negatively regulates Mitofusin required for mitochondrial outer membrane fusion. Researchers generated an in vivo IBMPFD model in adult Drosophila muscle and found that VCP disease mutants act as hyperactive enzymes with respect to Mitofusin regulation, leading to mitochondrial defects, muscle tissue damage, and cell death. VCP inhibitors were also found to suppress mitochondrial defects, muscle tissue damage, and cell death associated with IBMPFD models in Drosophila, as well as suppress mitochondrial fusion and respiratory defects in IBMPFD patient fibroblasts, suggesting a therapeutic value for VCP inhibitors. The pathological mechanism of IBMPFD is not clear, and there is currently no treatment. The disease mainly affects organs with high energy expenditure, such as muscle and brain, and is caused by single missense mutations of VCP.
Human body odor is caused by the production of volatile odors, including the sulphurous thioalcohol 3-methyl-3-sulfanylhexan-1-ol produced in the underarm as a result of specific microbial activity. The mechanism by which bacteria recognize and produce body odor is still poorly understood. A recent study reports the structural and biochemical basis of bacterial transport of S-Cys-Gly-3M3SH, a malodour precursor molecule, by Staphylococcus hominis which is converted to 3M3SH in the bacterial cytoplasm, before being released into the environment. The study identifies the biochemical and structural basis for the recognition and specific transport of the malodour precursor peptide, providing further molecular insights into the role of the skin microbiota in human scent generation.
Monocytes, phagocytic effector cells in the blood and precursors of resident and inflammatory tissue macrophages, participate in steady-state surveillance of the lung, according to a new study. Migratory monocytes are either found patrolling within large vessels of the lung or locating at the interface between lung capillaries and alveoli. This spatial organisation, which gives monocytes the property to capture fluorescent particles derived from both vascular and airway routes, is complementary to resident macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) and does not differentiate into macrophages. In the mouse, one subset called 'classical monocytes' expresses high levels of both Ly6C and the chemokine receptor CCR2 but a low level of the fractalkine receptor.
The speed at which RNA polymerase II elongates is crucial in determining the rate of mRNA production. Researchers examined the dynamics of RNA polymerase II using mouse ES cells and two inhibitors to track Pol II. They found that pause escape and initiation were both ubiquitous and crucial steps within transcription cycles. Furthermore, the rate of Pol II elongation was influenced by various genic features, such as histone modifications, GC content, DNA methylation, and exon density. The study revealed that elongation rates varied substantially among both intergenic and genic regions. Pol II dynamics were determined to be highly dynamic within gene regions, while paused Pol II was stable, as seen in the half-life measurements at approximately 3200 genes. The study also showed that elongation rates increased within the gene body. The researchers conclude that elongation rates have a role in regulating transcription and potentially co-transcriptional processes.
Researchers have discovered the functional integration between two types of photoreceptor cells in the Platynereis dumerilii, a marine annelid. The two types, rhabdomeric and ciliary photoreceptor cells, are responsible for different behaviors such as UV sensitivity and vertical swimming. Using connectomics, the researchers mapped the synaptic paths between these two types of cells in the platonic larva and found that ciliary photoreceptors are presynaptic to the rhabdomeric circuit. The research further revealed that the ciliary photoreceptors regulate the behaviors mediated by the rhabdomeric cells, suggesting a hierarchical interaction between the two types of cells. Furthermore, the researchers discovered that Platynereis c-opsin1-expressing cPRCs absorb UV light and mediate circadian entrainment by ambient UV light.
Researchers have identified a potential means of identifying those individuals who could safely interrupt ART (antiretroviral therapy) in future HIV eradication trials. Previously, the lack of clarity surrounding the cells types that might harbour the HIV reservoir has meant that measurement of the clinical relevance and utility of measuring this reservoir, regardless of assay, remains unclear. However, studies have shown that the reservoir appears to persist indefinitely, unless ART is administered indefinitely. As new interventions to cure HIV-1 infection are developed and taken into clinical trials, a means to measure their efficacy is needed as stopping ART to await the return of viraemia would be the ‘gold standard’ approach but has been associated with risk. Researchers from both Imperial College London and the University of Oxford, therefore, looked at alternative methods to measuring efficacy, using individuals in the SPARTAC trial of primary HIV-1 infection to determine a prediction for clinical progression and viral replication following ART. They measured the amount of HIV-1 DNA in these individuals and looked at the associations between HIV-1 DNA and immunological and virological markers of clinical progression, including viral rebound in those interrupting therapy. Multivariate analysis showed that HIV-1 DNA was more predictive of disease progression than plasma viral load and, at treatment interruption, predicted time to plasma virus rebound. Therefore HIV-1 DNA may help identify individuals who could safely interrupt ART in future HIV-1 eradication trials.
This article discusses the challenges of dosing drugs based on population-level responses, which can result in over or under-dosing for specific individuals. The authors studied the relationship between population-based and individual-based responses to anesthetics in mice and zebrafish and found that individual responses fluctuated dynamically at a fixed drug concentration, with resistance to state transitions. This variability in anesthetic sensitivity and responsiveness makes it difficult to appropriately dose anesthetics for each individual. The authors suggest that identifying the biological substrate of noise may spur novel therapies and enable personalized medicine. Effective concentration, a commonly used measure of population-based drug potency, cannot be adequately applied to an individual due to the resistance to state transitions.
Scientists have found that when visibility is reduced, the perceived speed of movement differs depending on whether the visibility reduction is distance-dependent or uniform. When contrast reduction depends on distance, for example in fog, objects that are further away appear to move faster than they actually are. This leads drivers in foggy conditions to drive slower. When visibility reduction is uniform, however, objects appear to move slower than they actually are, leading drivers to drive faster in these conditions. The study used driving simulation and psychophysics measurements to demonstrate the effects of distance-dependent contrast reduction on motion perception. This insight provides a better understanding of how reduced visibility conditions affect perceived speed by casting new light on the human visual system.
The article discusses the regenerative capabilities of planarians, which can regenerate all body parts including the central nervous system (CNS). The authors conducted a gene expression-guided functional screen to identify factors that regulate neural regeneration in Schmidtea mediterranea. They identified molecules and cell types that influence neural cell fates, support the formation of major connective hubs, and promote reestablishment of chemosensory behavior. The researchers also investigated genes downregulated during planarian regeneration and characterized glial cells in the planarian CNS that respond to injury by repressing several transcripts. The authors suggest that an improved understanding of brain regeneration in planarians could lead to new therapies for the treatment of stroke, neurological disease, and brain injury.
Researchers have developed a method for in-vivo imaging of extracellular adenosine 5' triphosphate (ATP), a ubiquitous extracellular signaling messenger, with high spatiotemporal resolution. They prepared a hybrid-type fluorescent ATP sensor composed of an ATP-binding protein and a small-molecule fluorescent dye that can be anchored on the plasma membrane to detect extracellular ATP. The sensor, called ATPOS (ATP Optical Sensor), is pH-independent, has high selectivity for ATP over ATP metabolites and other nucleotides and is suitable for detection of extracellular ATP. To enable in-vivo validation, the researchers introduced the BoNT/C-Hc binding to neuronal plasma membrane and Alexa Fluor 488 for ratiometric measurement. The resulting ATPOS complex binds to neurons in cerebral cortex of living mice and can clearly visualise a concentrically propagating wave of extracellular ATP release in response to electrical stimulation.
The study explores the regulatory mechanism controlling ULBP expression as a response to DNA damage, excessive proliferation, or viral infection. The study finds that IMP3 interacts with ULBP2 mRNA, leading to ULBP2 transcript destabilization and reduced ULBP2 surface expression. The article shows that IMP3 negatively regulates NKG2D ligands leading to impaired NK cell recognition of transformed cells. The findings highlight the importance of RNA binding proteins in immunological recognition and provide insights into the complex biological processes regulated by the powerful oncogene, IMP3.
A new population model demonstrates the Parrondo's paradox in organisms, whereby alternating between losing strategies can result in population persistence and long-term growth. The model includes two sub-populations: nomads and colonists. Nomadism and colonialism are modeled as losing strategies, but when the behavior is alternated in response to changes in the colonial habitat, population survival is possible. The colonial strategy is history-dependent and switching to the nomadic strategy allows for resources to recover. The survival of the population depends on the difference between the switching levels and colonial growth rate. Simulation results over a range of parameters predict this paradoxical behavior and elucidate the conditions under which it occurs.
The neural mechanisms underlying the transformation of egocentric sensory and motor experience into allocentric spatial representation are largely unknown. The researchers addressed this problem in electric fish by conducting neural recordings in the preglomerular complex, the thalamic region connecting the optic tectum with the spatial learning circuits. While tectal topographic information was mostly eliminated in preglomerular neurons, the time-intervals between object encounters were precisely encoded. The researchers suggest that similar mechanisms are involved in sequential spatial learning in all vertebrates.
Researchers have found evidence for phase-dependent stimulus representations for categories in human brains. The study involved six patients with medication-resistant epilepsy viewing images of faces, houses, scenes and tools while undergoing intracranial recordings. Researchers identify phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) of gamma amplitude to low frequency phase, and further analyse PAC to reveal categorised HFA modulations at different frequencies of the underlying low-frequency rhythm, allowing decoding of categorical info based on the phase at which the HFA event occurs. The findings suggest that during periods with pronounced HFA, categorical representations can be recovered based on the phase of low-frequency oscillations, supporting the idea of phase-coded neural representations in humans.
Researchers have determined the crystal structure of PfRh5, a protein that is essential for the survival and virulence of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, and is a promising target for a vaccine against the disease. The protein binds to the host receptor basigin and plays a crucial role in invading red blood cells. The protein structure comprises nine anti-parallel α-helices around a β-hairpin. Antibodies to PfRh5 can block merozoite invasion and clinical data shows that antibodies to PfRh5 are associated with protection against malaria.
A meta-analysis was conducted to understand how predators impact mosquito traits relevant to vector-borne diseases, including survival, development, size, and oviposition. Predation was found to have consumptive and non-consumptive effects on mosquito survival and body size, with mosquito larval size playing a more important role in explaining the heterogeneity of consumptive effects. Predation was also found to impact mosquito vectors' behavior during oviposition, which could explain associations between drought and human West Nile virus cases. The analysis highlights the importance of considering vector traits as predictors of transmission and using non-insecticide-based strategies in biocontrol.
Host proteostasis mechanisms may play a significant role in shaping the fitness of viral protein variants, according to a study investigating influenza in host cells with chemically-controlled proteostasis environments. The research indicated that both the nature of selection on the influenza genome and the accessibility of specific mutational trajectories were significantly impacted by host proteostasis. Such findings could shed light on understanding the host-pathogen interactions of RNA viruses and could have implications for predicting and preventing RNA viral pathogen evolution.
Peripheral nerve impairment is common in neurometabolic diseases but not yet fully understood. A new study has found that glial lipid metabolism is critical for axon function, independent of myelin, making it an important aspect of axon-glia interactions. Schwann cells contain peroxisomes, which are important for degrading fatty acids derived from myelin lipids and generating precursors of myelin plasmalogens. Peroxisomal dysfunction can be caused by mutations of genes encoding peroxisomal proteins or peroxisomal biogenesis factors, and this impairment is responsible for causing a secondary failure of local lysosomes, thereby impairing the turnover of gangliosides in myelin. This reveals a new aspect of axon-glia interactions, uncovering the connection between Schwann cell lipid metabolism and the anchorage of juxtaparanodal Kv1-channels. The study also found that reduced CAPs are likely caused by functional conduction blocks rather than physical axon loss. Signs of axonal transport defects and indirect signs of neurodegeneration were not observed.
This document discusses the interaction between adult stem cells and their specialized tissue microenvironment (or "niche") in maintaining tissue homeostasis and restoring tissue function after perturbations. Using hair follicles as a model, the study shows that when junctional perturbations in the niche disrupt barrier function, adjacent stem cells dramatically change their transcriptome and become capable of directly signaling to and recruiting immune cells, while also elevating cell cycle transcripts which reduce their quiescence threshold. These changes enable them to selectively proliferate within the microenvironment of immune distress cues and contain the breach in the barrier. It is revealed that the niche is not merely a source of secreted factors that control stem cell activity and tissue growth, but a key structural entity whose integrity is closely monitored by its vigilant stem cell residents. The study also explores the importance of E-cadherin in maintaining intercellular adhesion, junctional integrity and proliferation in epithelial tissues within the hair follicle, and how its selective loss triggers a barrier breach that stresses the immune system.
The distribution and activity of secreted signaling proteins called morphogens are critical for many developmental processes. Nodal morphogens play a vital role in embryonic axis formation, but how the Nodal morphogen gradient is formed in vivo remains unclear. Researchers used fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to study the binding affinity of Nodal ligands to their major cell surface receptor, Acvr2b, and to the Nodal inhibitor, Lefty, as well as the diffusion coefficient of Nodal ligands and Lefty inhibitors in live zebrafish embryos. They found that ligand clearance via degradation shapes the Nodal gradient and correlates with its signaling range. They also demonstrated that diffusivity, extra-cellular interactions, and selective ligand destruction collectively shape the Nodal morphogen gradient.
Researchers conducted population genetic and phylogenetic analyses of the CLTCL1 gene to understand the evolution and potential selective processes involved in the CHC22 clathrin coat's specialized function. They found evidence of independent gene loss in at least two vertebrate lineages, and strong evidence for purifying selection to support CHC22 functionality. They also identified two common allotypes of human CHC22 that had different functional properties, indicating that ancestral human dietary change influenced the selection of allotypes that affect CHC22's role in metabolism. The researchers concluded that variation in the CHC22 clathrin coat may be a response to changing nutritional pressures both between and within vertebrate species.
Researchers have generated high-resolution promoter capture Hi-C (PCHi-C) maps in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) to provide a detailed understanding of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). By linking 1999 CVD-associated SNPs to 347 target genes via the CM PCHi-C map, more than 90% of SNP-target gene interactions did not involve the nearest gene, while 40% of SNPs interacted with at least two genes. The study demonstrates the importance of considering long-range chromatin interactions when interpreting functional targets of disease loci.
A new multi-order mimicry complex has been identified, consisting of at least 140 different putative mimics from four arthropod orders including ants, wasps, bugs, tree hoppers and spiders. All members of this mimicry complex are characterised by a conspicuous golden body and an ant gestalt, but vary substantially in their defensive traits. The study found that they were similarly effective at deterring predators - even mildly defended mimics were rarely eaten by a community of invertebrate and vertebrate predators both in the wild and during staged trials. The cluster analysis suggested the existence of ten putative rings within the complex, according to variation in the dorsal color pattern, but the differences were small. There was no strong effect of phylogeny on the classification into rings.
This article describes a model of memory that takes into account the dynamic nature of memory retrieval. The model is based on a network of neurons with asymmetric synaptic connections that produces spontaneous, dynamic retrieval of memories. The model can retrieve multiple memories and the retrieval speed can be modulated by the sparsity of the representation. The model is based on continuous attractor network theory, which is a type of neural network that can simulate the behavior of a population of neurons. The model is able to retrieve memories in any direction but not alternate between them. The network is able to retrieve multiple manifolds, each representing a different memory, and the retrieval speed can be modulated by the sparsity of the representation. The article concludes by discussing the implications of the model for understanding the neural basis of memory.
This article investigates the emergence of tissue-scale patterns in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc during larval development, and how patterns of cellular morphology arise during tissue development. The study found that a pattern of radially oriented cell rearrangements is coupled to the buildup of tangential cell elongation. The study shows that active patterning of radial cell neighbor exchanges can account for the observed cell morphology patterns and provides evidence that this active patterning could be self-organized by mechanosensitive feedback. The study also identifies a region around the DV boundary with a morphological pattern that differs from the rest of the wing pouch. The study confirms previous static observations of the pattern and further identifies radial gradients in cell area and cell elongation that strengthen in time in the absence of differential growth.
The HIV-1 accessory protein Vpr plays an important role in HIV replication and spread in macrophages by counteracting a macrophage-specific restriction factor that targets and reduces expression of the HIV Env protein. This study identifies the macrophage mannose receptor (MR) as a restriction factor targeting Env in primary human monocyte-derived macrophages and shows that Vpr acts synergistically with HIV Nef to dramatically reduce MR expression. Disrupting interactions between Env and MR reduces initial infection of macrophages by cell-free virus, but also rescues Env expression in HIV-1-infected macrophages lacking Vpr. These results reveal a Vpr-Nef-Env axis that hijacks a host mannose-MR response system to facilitate infection while evading MR’s normal role, which is to trap and destroy mannose-expressing pathogens.
The RNA-binding protein Sam68 has been found to strongly support the potential for self-renewal and balance the differentiation of mouse neural progenitor cells. The knockout of the Khdrbs1 gene resulted in a restriction of the pool of proliferating neural progenitor cells which limited cortical expansion. The study identifies Sam68 as a regulator of neural progenitor cell self-renewal and links modulation of ALDH1A3 expression to maintenance of high glycolytic metabolism during cortical development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of neurogenesis may lead to novel approaches to diseases caused by dysregulation of neurogenesis.
Preplay events are sequences of place cells that fire offline and are thought to support consolidation and future behaviour. Viewing the delivery of food to an unvisited portion of an environment leads to off-line pre-activation of place cell sequences corresponding to that space. Authors suggest that goal-biased preplay may prepare animals for future experiences in novel environments.
The study investigates how helicase and polymerase enzymes work together in leading strand DNA synthesis. Single-base resolution is used to create a structural model explaining the mutual stimulation of activities. The study finds that the helicase and polymerase both participate in DNA melting, with each enzyme melting the junction base pair partially. When combined, the junction base pair is melted cooperatively, provided the helicase is located one nucleotide ahead of the primer-end. The study also finds that T7 DNAP on its own does not unwind the 40 bp replication fork at fast rates, which is overcome by adding SSB. The unwinding kcat remains nearly constant and ranges from 190 to 140 bp/s as GC percentage increases, but the dNTPs Km increases steeply from 40 μM to 270 μM as the GC percentage increases. The study concludes by emphasizing the highly coordinated catalysis of the combined enzymes and how they mutually stimulate each other's activities during leading strand synthesis.
Researchers have found that the activational effects of estradiol, a female sex hormone, play a critical role in the generation of luteinizing hormone (LH) surges and maintain cyclicity through specific brain cells known as kisspeptin neurons. The researchers utilized CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing to disrupt estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) in two nuclei of the hypothalamus, AVPV and arcuate, in mice, leading to different reproductive phenotypes, respectively. Cells from mice with ERα disruption in AVPV kisspeptin neurons exhibited typical reproductive cycles but blunted LH surges, while those with ERα knocked down in arcuate kisspeptin neurons showed disrupted cyclicity. These findings may have implications for treating infertility caused by ovulatory disorders, which account for about 25% of all infertility cases.
Molecular recognition is crucial for biological function, with biological molecules often selecting one of several exchanging ligand conformations in solution. The Hsp70 chaperone, involved in maintaining the integrity of cellular proteome through its ATP-dependent interaction with client proteins, selects the unfolded state from an array of interconverting structures found in both bacterial and human Hsp70 chaperones. The Hsp70 family of molecular chaperones has an essential role in the health of cellular proteome across all domains of life. The protein consists of an ATPase domain and a substrate binding domain, and studies have revealed that substrates are globally unfolded in the Hsp70-bound state. The binding mechanisms, conformational selection and induced fit, were addressed in this article by analyzing the flux from either conformation of the client protein substrate to the unfolded-bound conformer. The results establish that the dominant binding process is via the conformational selection mechanism for both substrates considered, suggesting a conserved mode of client recognition among Hsp70s.
This article discusses the process by which T cells distinguish between self and foreign antigens in order to mount an immune response. The authors report single molecule measurements of T cell receptor (TCR) triggering by agonist peptides presented on antigen presenting cell surfaces, which showed that TCR triggering is stoichiometric with agonist peptides in a 1:1 ratio. The study also revealed that pMHC:TCR complexes exhibit long-lived, stable engagement in living cells. The results suggest that pMHC:TCR kinetic off-rates may be accelerated in living cells as a result of forces from the cytoskeleton. The authors utilize a hybrid live cell-supported membrane junction system to facilitate simultaneous observations of the molecular binding kinetics, stoichiometry, and movement of individual signaling complexes in living T cells.
New research has shown that cyanobacteria, i.e. blue-green algae, act as spherical "microlenses" to enable accurate phototaxis, the process by which they move towards or away from light sources, specific to the position of the light source. The research suggests that these bacteria represent a "microscopic eyeball." This directional control is produced using the type IV pili, which act as photoreceptors, and the researchers say that understanding this movement could be applied to developing more efficient biotechnology in the future.
A new study has challenged assumptions about the mechanisms behind mitochondrial fission, the process whereby mitochondria divide to maintain cellular function. The dynamin GTPase Drp1 has long been known to play a crucial role in mitochondrial fission, but the mechanisms that control its recruitment to fission sites have so far not been clear. However, scientists studying live cells have found evidence that supports an alternative to the current theory that cytosolic Drp1 is directly recruited to fission sites just prior to fission. The researchers found that mitochondrial-bound Drp1 molecules progressively matured through incorporating smaller and smaller units, sometimes translocating directionally along mitochondria, and that the act of fission was dependent on factors such as actin filaments, which targeted productive oligomerisation to fission sites. Mitochondrial fission is crucial for cell function, particularly in neurons, and disruption of the process has been linked to neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.
This document describes the process of muscle formation in Drosophila larvae, which is regulated by a combination of identity transcription factors (ITFs) expressed by progenitor cells (PCs) and positional information from the ectoderm. The sequential emergence of PCs at the same position prompted investigations into how developmental time controls muscle identity. The study identified several new muscle ITFs, including Anterior Open, Eyes absent, and No Ocelli, which are involved in controlling PC birth time and specifying PC identity. The study also revealed a dynamic cascade of regulation integrating time and space, feed-forward loops, and the use of alternative transcription start sites. These findings provide a comprehensive view of the transcription control of muscle identity in Drosophila and a framework for studying interactions between general myogenic factors and ITFs in the diversification of muscle shapes.
Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) is a common condition, affecting over 30% of people over 65. A new study has identified the SLC7A8/SLC3A2 heterodimer as a candidate for ARHL, as its ablation in a mouse study resulted in damage to cochlear structures and hearing loss, while several SLC7A8 variants were also found in ARHL patients in screening tests. The study showed that SLC7A8 is expressed in the mouse inner ear and lack of the protein caused ARHL. The deficiency in hearing in the mice was more severe with age and associated with loss of cells in the spiral ganglion and decreased expression of specific biomarkers. The study provides evidence of a previously unknown role of SLC7A8 in hearing loss, and suggests that a considerable number of ARHL cases could be explained by SLC7A8 mutations.
Researchers have discovered the first phage-encoded SAMase structures, which are important in epigenetic changes in many organisms and play a crucial role in anti-bacterial defense mechanisms by inhibiting the methylation of host DNA. Svi3-3, one of the newly identified SAM degrading enzymes, was cloned, expressed, and purified. Investigations into the phage-encoded SAMases revealed that they are lyases, forming MTA and L-homoserine lactone in a unimolecular reaction mechanism, rather than the previously believed hydrolases. The structure shows a trimer of alpha-beta sandwiches similar to the GlnB-like superfamily, with active sites formed at the trimer interfaces.
The antiviral protein TRIM5α engages in evolutionary arms races with viruses to gain or evade immune defense. Using deep mutational scanning, researchers comprehensively measured how single mutations in the TRIM5α v1 loop affect restriction of different retroviruses. They found that the majority of mutations increase weak antiviral function, and random mutations do not disrupt potent viral restriction, indicating that TRIM5α's adaptive landscape is broad and mutationally resilient. The study also identified that the primary v1 loop determinant for TRIM5α's restriction of HIV-1 and other lentiviruses is its net electrostatic charge, and most gains in HIV-1 restriction could be accounted for by reducing this charge.
The human TIM22 complex, responsible for importing hydrophobic carrier proteins into the mitochondrial inner membrane, has been poorly characterized. A new metazoan-specific subunit, Tim29 (previously C19orf52), has been identified as necessary for stability of the TIM22 complex and for the assembly of hTim22. Tim29 also contacts the Translocase of the Outer Mitochondrial Membrane (TOM) complex, enabling the transport of hydrophobic carrier substrates across the intermembrane space. The composition of the human TIM22 complex is likely different from that of yeast, and the identification of Tim29 highlights the importance of analyzing mitochondrial import systems across phylogenetic boundaries to reveal novel components and mechanisms.
The document describes a new method for visualizing and quantifying transmembrane potentials (Vmem) in mammalian cells using fluorescence lifetime imaging (VF-FLIM). This new method provides a more accurate and non-invasive way to measure absolute Vmem with single-cell resolution, allowing for better understanding of the physiology of non-excitable cells in areas such as cancer, cellular differentiation, and body patterning. The use of VF-FLIM allows for precise measurements of how resting Vmem affects cellular processes, making it a valuable tool for studying gradual shifts in resting membrane potential. The method is benchmarked against previously reported approaches and shows significant resolution improvements. The authors demonstrate that VF-FLIM can successfully track the evolution of Vmem hyperpolarization in human carcinoma cells, and identify the source of the hyperpolarization as the Ca2+-activated K+ channel KCa3.1. The method is generalizable and effective in a range of cell lines, making it a useful tool for studying Vmem dynamics.
The study investigated how rats learned to associate the consumption of a novel taste (0.1% saccharin) with visceral malaise from a lithium chloride injection, specifically how the taste memory trace was maintained and associated with nausea following long delays. The study found that there were two parallel memory traces of the novel taste: a short-duration robust trace, lasting approximately 3 hours and maintained by a NMDAR-dependent CaMKII-AMPAR pathway in the insular cortex, and a long-duration weak one, lasting up to 8 hours and dependent on the strong trace for its formation. The study suggested that a memory trace undergoes rapid modifications, and that the mechanisms underlying trace associative learning differ when items in the memory are experienced at different time points. The study found that there is a shift in the associability of the taste memory trace at around 3 to 4 hours after exposure to the taste stimulus. The study also examined the phosphorylation/expression levels of CaMKIIα in the insular cortex and observed that the T286 phosphorylation of CaMKIIα was increased in the P2-fraction 30 minutes following novel taste consumption, persisting for up to 3 hours, but not 5 or 8 hours afterwards.
Virophages can provide defense against giant viruses for unicellular eukaryotes by integrating into their nuclear genome and reactivating upon superinfection. Endogenous mavirus-like elements (EMALEs) were found to be widespread and diverse in Cafeteria burkardae strains and constitute up to 2% of their host genomes. These EMALEs separated into eight types and carried diverse promoter motifs that interact with different giant viruses. Some insertion loci were conserved between host strains, while the majority were unique to a given host strain, suggesting that EMALEs are active and mobile. Furthermore, a unique association between EMALEs and a group of tyrosine recombinase retrotransposons was uncovered, revealing parasitism in this nested microbial system. The findings suggest that virophages have an influential role in the ecology and evolution of their hosts.
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is a genetic disorder that causes muscle weakness, usually in the face, shoulders and upper arms in adults. It is caused by the misexpression of a gene called DUX4 in skeletal muscle, which triggers apoptosis and FSHD. The mechanism of DUX4 toxicity in muscle is not yet fully understood but increased levels of DUX4 can inhibit nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), a process that eliminates mRNAs with premature stop codons, which can cause errors in protein production. This article reports on a study investigating how DUX4 inhibits NMD, and found that DUX4-triggered proteolytic degradation of UPF1, a central component of NMD, results in global accumulation of RNAs normally degraded as NMD substrates. This feedback loop illustrates an unexpected mode of autoregulatory behavior of a transcription factor, is consistent with ‘bursts’ of DUX4 expression in FSHD muscle and has implications for FSHD pathogenesis. The study also found that DUX4 mRNA is an endogenous NMD substrate.
ANAC044 and ANAC085, NAC-type transcription factors in Arabidopsis, are required for DNA damage-induced G2 cell cycle arrest. They enhance protein accumulation of the Myb transcription factor Rep-MYB, which represses G2/M-specific genes, and play a central role in orchestrating stress-induced G2 arrest by controlling Rep-MYB accumulation. ANAC044 and ANAC085 are not required for the induction of genes for DNA repair proteins or CDK inhibitors, but actively regulate cell cycle progression. Previous studies found five serine-glutamine (SQ) motifs are present in SOG1 but missing in ANAC044 and ANAC085, suggesting that ANAC044 and ANAC085 pursue distinct functions in the DNA damage response pathway.
The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery separates daughter cells during cytokinetic abscission. Aurora B and the ESCRT-III subunit CHMP4C regulate this process with the abscission checkpoint, which delays abscission in response to chromosome missegregation. The Unc-51-like kinase 3 (ULK3) phosphorylates and binds ESCRT-III subunits via tandem MIT domains, thereby delaying abscission in response to lagging chromosomes, nuclear pore defects, and tension forces at the midbody. ULK3 phosphorylates IST1, which provides an essential inhibitory signal in the abscission checkpoint. The ULK3 MIT domains bind tightly to IST1, an ESCRT-III subunit required for cytokinesis. ULK3 interacts with a specific subset of ESCRT-III proteins in cells more tightly with IST1 than other ESCRT-III proteins.
A study has looked at the succession of bacterial clades during spring phytoplankton blooms in the southern North Sea (German Bight) for four consecutive years. The study found that there were recurring patterns down to the genus level and at the functional level with respect to algal polysaccharide degradation genes. The study hypothesizes that the succession of bacterial clades is largely governed by deterministic principles. The study also provides evidence that the succession of bacterioplankton clades that existed in 2009 re-occurred during the spring blooms from 2010 to 2012, which might lead to an explanatory model for bacterioplankton succession dynamics during spring algae blooms.
Researchers have studied the neural representation of punishment risk during reward-seeking behaviour in rats. They designed a task where actions were consistently rewarded but probabilistically punished, recording spike activity and local field potentials simultaneously from the VTA and mPFC regions of the brain. They found that ensembles of dopamine and non-dopamine VTA neurons and mPFC neurons encode the relationship between action and punishment. They also found that coherent theta oscillations synchronize VTA and mPFC during punishment-free actions, but this synchrony declined with punishment probability, indicating that risk of punishment diminishes VTA-driven neural synchrony. The study suggests that representation of punishment during reward-seeking actions is critical for survival and optimal action selection, and may be associated with behavioural patterns observed in impulsive behaviour and addictive disorders.
Teleost trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) have evolved a novel way to recognize amines, according to a study published in eLife. Researchers found the receptors detect amines in a non-classical orientation that makes Asp5.42 a key part of the recognition process. Chemical screening also found that eleven zebrafish TAARs, including serotonin and histamine, no longer needed Asp3.32 to recognise the compounds, but instead had Asp5.42. Researchers suggested that this revealed that different members of the G protein-coupled receptor family can evolve different binding pockets for the same agonist.
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans uses a multi-stage search for food, exploring a small area intensively before switching to exploring a much larger area. This search strategy, as well as the transition between them, can be explained by a maximally informative search strategy, where the searcher seeks to continuously maximize information about the target. This approach can be viewed as a generalization of following direct sensory gradients to a broader and more challenging set of behavioral tasks.  The infotaxis model can quantitatively account for the properties of worm search behavior after removal from food.
Researchers have developed improved red GECIs, genetically encoded calcium indicators, allowing for non-invasive measurement of activity in large populations of neurons and small neuronal compartments. Previous GECIs with red-shifted excitation and emission spectra were limited compared to GFP-based GCaMP6 indicators, but jRCaMP1a, jRCaMP1b, and jRGECO1a have sensitivity comparable to GCaMP6. The improved performance of the new red GECIs allows for deep-tissue imaging, dual-color imaging, and the use of optogenetics in combination with calcium imaging. The researchers used structure-guided mutagenesis and neuron-based screening to develop the new GECIs.
The article discusses a case of convergent evolution in fungal lineages where a set of genes coding for ribosomal proteins gained cis-regulatory sequences for a particular transcription regulator, Mcm1, independently. Evidence shows that gains occurred because Mcm1 shares a mechanism of transcriptional activation with an ancestral regulator of the ribosomal protein genes, Rap1. The gain of the Mcm1 sites was potentiated in several different clades by the presence of Rap1, and both regulators interact with the general transcription factor TFIID, which facilitated the repeated evolution of the Mcm1 sites in independent lineages. The article also discusses how genomic studies have found sets of genes that underlie convergent evolution of a wide variety of traits from across the tree of life and how such sets of genes tend to evolve in functionally related groups and are controlled by cis-regulatory sequences for particular transcription regulators.
Mitochondria have a distinct pathway for fatty acid synthesis, known as mtFAS, that is poorly characterized compared to the well-known cytoplasmic enzyme FASN. While FASN produces only palmitate, mtFAS appears to have at least two major products, including octanoate, which is required for the production of an important cofactor for various mitochondrial enzymes, including pyruvate dehydrogenase. However, the cellular functions and roles of other products of mtFAS are largely unknown. This study shows that mtFAS function is essential for the assembly of mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) complex and impacts cellular metabolism and behavior in mouse skeletal myoblasts. Loss of mtFAS also blocked the differentiation of skeletal myoblasts in vitro. The study suggests that mtFAS-mediated fatty acid synthesis is a key regulator of mitochondrial respiratory metabolism, and the enzymes of mtFAS are ubiquitously expressed in mammalian tissues, particularly in skeletal muscle and heart.
Researchers have found evidence that lampreys, which diverged from other vertebrates over 500 million years ago, possess key functional features of modern-day vertebrate rods, implying that these early organisms already had dim-light vision before jawed vertebrates emerged 420 million years ago. The study shows that the electrical properties of certain lamprey cells known as short photoreceptors are similar to those found in rods, even though these cells also have features of the cone cells, which predated the development of rods. The findings suggest that middle Cambrian vertebrates must have possessed functionally advanced rod precursors, in response to strong selective pressure caused by the emergence of ecologies capable of spatially resolved vision.
CpG islands (CGIs) are atypical DNA sequences that mark most gene promoters and are predominantly non-methylated. Recent research has shown that CGI chromatin has a characteristic bivalent chromatin structure, which can be developmental programmed at specific genes or imposed by shared features of CGI DNA. This study aimed to determine how CGI chromatin is formed and whether it is programmed at specific genes or imposed by shared DNA features. The findings showed that both CpG-richness and G + C-richness are required for the induction of signature chromatin structures at CGIs. The study also found that a high CpG density is not sufficient for bivalent chromatin structure, as A+T-rich sequence settings always provoke de novo DNA methylation. The results indicate that CpG-richness is essential for the formation of bivalent chromatin, whereas G+C-richness is required to exclude DNA methylation which, when present, is dominant over other chromatin marks. The DNA sequence composition of artificial promoter-less CGIs was varied to assess the relative importance of G+C-richness and high CpG density. The study relied upon chromosomal integration of artificial CGI-like sequences into the genome of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to compare them to natural CGIs. The results showed that the artificial CGI-like DNA sequences induced a novel bivalent chromatin structure in the ESCs indicating that CGI chromatin is developmentally programmed by shared features of CGI DNA, which are CpG-richness and G+C-richness.
The role of NFkB-inducing kinase (NIK) in the development and function of γδ T cells, a type of immune cell that produces pro-inflammatory cytokines and plays a role in the body's defence against infection and autoimmune disease, was investigated. It was found that NIK is essential for the formation of a fully functional γδ T cell compartment and for the thymic hardwiring of γδ T cell cytokine production. The absence of NIK caused a selective loss of IL-17 expression by γδ T cells, while their ability to express IFN-γ was not affected. DETCs - a specific subset of γδ T cells found in the skin - were almost absent in the skin of NIK-deficient embryos. The molecular pathways underlying these phenomena and the mechanisms underlying the pre-determined cytokine profile of γδ T cells remain incompletely understood.

This study investigated the neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying energy utilization in long-term flight in locusts. The adipokinetic hormone/corazonin-related peptide (ACP) was identified as a key flight-related neuropeptide that facilitates muscle lipid utilization in locusts. RNAi screening and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of the ACP gene and ACP receptor gene (ACPR) significantly decreased prolonged flight in locusts. Transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses revealed that genes and metabolites involved in fatty acid transport and oxidation were notably downregulated in ACP mutants. A fatty-acid-binding protein (FABP) was found to mediate the effects of ACP in regulating muscle lipid metabolism during long-term flight in locusts. Flight is an intense and energy-demanding physiological process in insects, and complex and precise spatial and temporal regulation of energy metabolism is essential for long-term flight performance. Neuropeptides play essential roles in coordinating systematic energy metabolism during insect flight. A number of neuropeptides are involved in energy metabolism in the flight muscle, such as adipokinetic hormone (AKH), which promotes glycolysis and lipid mobilization in the fat body in different insect species. The migratory locust, which possesses a notable long-term flight capacity, was used as a study model for the neurohormonal regulation of flight-related energy metabolism. The patterns of energy metabolism in the locust display tissue-specific and time-dependent patterns during tethered flight. Usually, metabolism involved in long-term flight in insects contains two major phases. During the early stage of flight, carbohydrates in flight muscle and hemolymph significantly decrease, and lipid mobilization in the fat body gradually increases thereafter followed by utilization in the flight muscle during the prolonged flight phase, indicating a clear transition in energy consumption from carbohydrates to lipids during long-term flight.
Researchers have identified a family of transport proteins that are important for the growth and replication of intracellular Microsporidia parasites. The universal retention of these transporters among reduced genomes indicates an essential role for intracellular parasites. Using Trachipleistophora hominis as the experimental model, the proteins were identified as ATP and GTP transporters on the parasite surface during intracellular growth and replication. Microsporidia parasites are severely streamlined and have undergone conspicuous genomic reduction due to their lifestyle, which involves only completing their life cycle inside infected eukaryotic cells. Due to the loss of indigenous pathways for making ATP and nucleotides, Microsporidia are thus entirely dependent on the host cells they infect for their energy needs. Nonetheless, there is currently minimal functional data for Microsporidia transporters despite their crucial role. The study provides further insight into the parasitic behavior of the Microsporidia, indicating they have at least two distinct transport systems for importing ATP and GTP from infected host cells to complete its intracellular lifecycle.
The article discusses the phyllotaxis, the arrangement of plant organs, as a model system for developmental mechanisms. The classical deterministic view of phyllotaxis is revisited in order to understand the noise that can arise from biological systems at various scales. The study shows that phyllotaxis disorders can reveal the parameters driving the dynamics of phyllotaxis, and the article further explores this theory using various species with spiral phyllotaxis. The article concludes that inspections of disorders in phyllotactic patterns could further inform us of mechanisms driving developmental systems.
A study using mice lacking three barrier proteins in the outermost epidermal layer has shown that these mice were highly resistant to developing benign skin tumours when treated with a chemical carcinogen. The mice showed an exaggerated atopic response to the chemical promoting agent, but the response could be normalised by blocking certain signalling elements. The findings suggest that atopy is protective against skin cancer in experimental models, and that the mechanism involves keratinocytes communicating with cells of the immune system via signalling elements that normally protect against environmental damage. Clinical studies in humans have indicated that allergic diseases are inversely associated with skin cancers.
The study explores the use of [
The authors describe a new method of precise optogenetic stimulation on the skin of freely behaving mice. This approach allows for spatiotemporally precise and dynamic stimulation of nociceptor and low-threshold mechanoreceptor inputs to map behavioral responses. The authors provide an analysis toolkit that can quantify the millisecond-timescale dynamics of behavioral responses using machine vision methods. The authors demonstrate the utility of the technique by examining the relationship between nociceptive input and protective behaviors, showing that the total area of stimulated skin and the spatial arrangement of sub-threshold stimulations determine the behavioral response probability. Moreover, the relative number of nociceptors firing a single-action potential determines the features of the behavioral response, placing constraints on how stimulus intensity can be encoded.
A study using complementary RNA-sequencing approaches detected numerous 3' ends in the 5' untranslated regions and ORFs of Escherichia coli, suggesting extensive regulation by premature transcription termination. The study identified new sites of regulation, short RNA fragments derived from 5' UTRs and sequences internal to ORFs, and demonstrated that these fragments function as independent sRNA regulators. The findings reveal an abundance of cis- and trans-acting RNA regulators in bacterial 5' UTRs and internal to ORFs, suggesting extensive and diverse regulation through premature transcription termination and RNase processing of mRNAs.
Lymph nodes play an essential role in the immune response; the nodes control lymphocyte migration, facilitating immune cell encounters with antigen-presenting cells. Recent findings indicate that Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a type of bioactive lysophospholipid, has effects on lymph node intranodal differentiation and migration. Produced by LN fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs), LPA2 (a lysophospholipid receptor) triggers and accelerates T-cell migration through the highly-confining meshwork. The findings suggest LPA acts acts as molecular guidance cues inside lymph nodes. A better understanding of intranodal migration could lead to the development of new drugs that manipulate LPA to improve the body’s immune responses.
H3F3A mutations generate either K27M or G34R/V mutant histone H3.3 in pediatric high-grade gliomas. The G34R mutation is commonly found in tumor suppressor protein p53 and chromatin remodeler ATRX. Fission yeast expressing the mutant H3-G34R displayed a reduction in H3K36 tri-methylation and H3K36 acetylation, which was not caused by a loss of Set2 expression. H3-G34R mutants were also found to have genomic instability, increased replication stress, and were defective in DNA damage repair by homologous recombination (HR). The G34R mutation may slow resolution of HR-mediated repair and impair chromosome segregation. RNA-Seq analyses showed that H3-G34R mutants have a distinct transcriptional profile to set2Δ, where transcripts deregulated in both mutants map to regions adjacent to subtelomeric regions of chromosomes. H3K36me2 may be a critical factor for repression in sub-subtelomeric (ST) domains in H3-G34R cells.
Researchers performed a high-content genome-wide small interfering RNA (siRNA) screen to identify genes regulating ciliogenesis as candidates for Joubert syndrome, which is caused by defective primary ciliogenesis or cilium stability. After analyzing the results, they identified six families with predominantly compound heterozygous mutations in KIAA0586. KIAA0586 is required for ciliogenesis and Sonic hedgehog signaling, and was previously missed by exome sequencing. The study demonstrates the usefulness of a cell-based screening approach to complement exome sequencing in identifying human disease genes.
A new study conducted in zebrafish indicates that macrophages and microglia play a significant role in the early stages of brain tumor development. The researchers overexpressed human AKT1 gene in neural cells of larval zebrafish using the LexPR transcriptional activator system, inducing abnormal cellular growth and morphology that mimicked the earliest stages of brain tumor growth. Subsequent observations of the zebrafish revealed that the increase is due to the infiltration of peripheral macrophages in the brain that leads to a significant increase in the macrophage and microglia populations. These cells then promote tumor proliferation, leading to an increase in tumour growth.
Researchers have identified a protein, glycerophosphodiesterase GDE3, that can be used to regulate the urokinase receptor (uPAR), a protein that is implicated in many physiological and pathological activities, including those involved in tumour progression. GDE3 breaks down and releases a less active form of uPAR, resulting in reduced breast cancer tumour growth in a xenograft model, and extends the lifespan of patients. The discovery of GDE3 suggests that GPI-anchor hydrolysis can alter cell behaviour and may be useful in future therapies for treating cancer.
A study has identified 12,498 high-confidence viral genomes linked to their microbial hosts, augmenting public data sets ten-fold and giving a first viral sequence for 13 new bacterial phyla including ecologically abundant phyla. It also helps identify 7-38% of unknown sequence space in viromes. Genome- and network-based classification suggests that 264 new viral genera (twice known genera) have been identified and cross-taxon genomic recombination is limited. The study shows the value of mining viral signal from microbial genomes for developing predictive ecosystem models and unifying eco-evolutionary theories.
This article discusses N-glycosylation, a process where complex sugars are added to proteins, which occurs frequently in the brain. The study found that hundreds of neuronal surface membrane proteins are core-glycosylated, meaning that the neuronal membrane displays surprisingly high levels of glycosylation profiles that are usually associated with immature proteins. This abnormal glycosylation can be attributed to a bypass or hypo-function of the Golgi apparatus. It was also found that core-glycosylated proteins are sufficient to sustain dendritic development and synaptic transmission indicating their full functionality. The study also shed light on a novel mechanism for controlling the composition and sensing properties of the neuronal membrane.
A new study has found that there is little evidence for biogeographic patterns in sourdough starter communities. The study analyzed 500 sourdough starters from four continents and found that variations in dough rise rates and aromas were largely explained by acetic acid bacteria, a mostly overlooked group of sourdough microbes. The study also found that strong co-occurrence patterns observed in situ and recreated in vitro demonstrate that microbial interactions shape sourdough community structure. The researchers did not find any strong associations between flour type or other fermentation practices and yeast species present. Additionally, the history and origins of sourdough starters may explain the distribution of some widespread microbial species. The study is the first to combine a large-scale survey of sourdough starter microbial diversity with quantitative analysis of the factors that shape the composition and function of starter microbiomes.
The transcription factor ASCIZ regulates the hub protein LC8, and has an unusually high number of recognition motifs for LC8. A model proposed in this study shows that intrinsic disorder and multiple LC8 binding events play a role in regulating LC8 transcription. The long intrinsically disordered C-terminal domain of ASCIZ binds LC8 to form a gradient of transcriptional activity that is inversely proportional to LC8 occupancy. Negative cooperativity is important for ASCIZ-LC8 interactions. Multiple binding sites in transcription factors generally provide a multivalent platform for the recruitment of regulatory binding partners. Higher order complex assembly is aided by the bivalent scaffold created when LC8 binds to a motif in intrinsically disordered regions. The high number of LC8 recognition motifs in ASCIZ is unique among partner proteins identified so far. The ASCIZ/LC8 interaction is critical for cellular health and homeostasis. This work explored the relationship between ASCIZ multivalency and LC8 transcription using a combination of biophysical, structural, and molecular biology tools. The high flexibility of ASCIZ facilitates a dynamic equilibrium of multivalent interactions that tune the level of ASCIZ transcriptional activity.
The study focuses on identifying the neural circuit mechanisms that underlie persistent activity and contribute to long-lasting changes in behavior. The researchers used the Drosophila female brain to show that certain neurons, called pC1d/e, can drive minutes-long changes in female behavior in the presence of males. They found strong recurrent connectivity between pC1d/e neurons and a specific subset of Fruitless+ neurons called aIPg. They also found that pC1d/e activation drives long-lasting persistent neural activity in brain areas and cells overlapping with the pC1d/e neural network, including both Doublesex+ and Fruitless+ neurons. The study links minutes-long persistent changes in behavior with persistent neural activity and recurrent circuit architecture in the female brain. The researchers used an automated reconstruction of a volume electron microscopic (EM) image of the female brain to map all inputs and outputs to both pC1d and pC1e.
A new study examines the role of the hormone oxytocin in coordinating contributions to group attacks or defense during intergroup conflict. In a double-blind placebo-controlled study with 480 male participants in a game where attackers and defenders competed against each other, oxytocin reduced contributions to attack and increased coordination of contributions among attackers over time. However, rather than promoting peace, attackers given oxytocin better tracked their rival's historical defense and coordinated their contributions into well-timed and hence more profitable attacks. The study suggests that oxytocin enables individuals to contribute to in-group efficiency and prosperity even when doing so implies outsiders are excluded or harmed.
The article discusses the evolution of phytochemical diversity in the genus Erysimum, which produces both ancestral glucosinolates and evolutionarily novel cardenolides as defenses against herbivores. The study analyzed the co-expression and diversification of these defenses across 48 Erysimum species, finding evidence that the two classes of defense metabolites evolved in response to different selective pressures and appear to have specific, non-redundant functions. The researchers sequenced and assembled the genome of E. cheiranthoides and constructed a phylogeny from transcriptome sequences of the other species to identify gene discordance and geographic clades. The study provides insights into the coevolutionary arms race between plants and herbivorous insects, the role of plant chemical defenses in niche segregation and insect community dynamics, and the metabolic constraints that limit the extent of phytochemical diversity within individual plants.
The paper responds to criticisms of previous work that had found aneuploidy was frequently observed in wild strains of S. cerevisiae and that genes subject to one or more modes of dosage compensation were enriched in the amplified genes. The authors reject the criticisms, stating that their original conclusions were supported by additional analysis and controls. They maintain their argument that aneuploidy is well tolerated in the wild strains of S. cerevisiae, that the group of genes enriched for those subject to dosage compensation show unique evolutionary signatures, and that dosage compensation has an important evolutionary effect by buffering expression against CNV in wild strains. The authors also provide additional computational analysis to support their claims about the tolerance of aneuploidy in wild strains.
Researchers report the development of a novel BirA enzyme called AirID (ancestral BirA for proximity dependent biotin identification) for pinpointing interacting proteins in cells. AirID was designed de novo using an ancestral enzyme reconstruction algorithm and metagenome data. AirID was able to identify proteins interacting with target bait proteins in vitro and in cells. The researchers used the wheat cell-free protein production system to synthesize these proteins and determine their enzymatic potential. The results indicate that AirID is a novel enzyme for analyzing protein-protein interactions in vitro and in cells.
The length of the poly(A) tail on mRNA affects translational efficiency (TE), with longer tails resulting in greater TE. However, this coupling between tail length and TE disappears later in development. This study found that the coupling is established through limiting cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (PABPC), where longer-tailed mRNAs compete effectively for limited PABPC. In post-embryonic systems, the regulatory regime diminishes the tight coupling, with PABPC contributing minimally to TE. This study reveals three fundamental mechanistic requirements for coupling and shows the context-dependent functions of PABPC in regulating mRNA stability and TE in different biological systems.
The article discusses the study of synaptic organization in the Drosophila antennal lobe, the first olfactory processing center. The researchers used fluorescent markers to identify synaptic organization and found distinct subglomerular and subcellular distributions for active zones in olfactory receptor neurons. The study also looked at the role of Teneurins, transmembrane proteins involved in neuromuscular synapse organization and synaptic partner matching. The goal of the study is to better understand how neural circuits process information through synaptic architecture in complex CNS circuits and their underlying molecular mechanisms. The researchers used Bruchpilot-Short to quantitatively measure the number of active zones of ORN axons. The study revealed that each ORN within a class contributes nearly identical active zone number and the correct number of ORN active zones and PN acetylcholine receptor clusters requires Teneurins.
The contribution of sensory and decisional processes to perceptual decision making is still unclear. In simple perceptual tasks, any tendency to choose one alternative more often (choice bias) is consistent with a bias in the sensory evidence, but also with a preference to select that alternative independently of the sensory evidence. To understand this better, humans were asked to perform a simple perceptual discrimination task with two symmetric alternatives under two different task instructions. The instructions varied the response mapping between perception and the category of the alternatives. The study found that most people exhibit idiosyncratic global choice biases that reflect biases in the sensory evidence and in the decisional process. Specifically, about half of the participants showed biases consistent with only a sensory origin and about half of the participant biases with a contribution of sensory and decisional biases.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with cardiovascular disease and efficient mitochondrial function is required in tissues with high energy demands, such as the heart. Researchers have discovered a novel mechanism through which the deletion of the BUD23 gene in murine cardiomyocytes reduces mitochondrial content and function, leading to severe cardiomyopathy and death. The study found that BUD23-dependent ribosome generation modulated the translation of mitochondrial transcripts in human cells and selectively promotes ribosomal interaction with low GC-content 5'UTRs. BUD23 was found to be essential for mammalian mitochondrial function, with implications for human mitochondrial disease and cardiomyopathy. The study also found that there was no overall impact on global protein translation rate in cells lacking BUD23. However, there was a marked loss of high efficiency mRNA translation, with the most down-regulated transcripts being those that code for mitochondrially-encoded proteins. Depletion of BUD23 resulted in a reduction of oxidative phosphorylation and Electron Transfer Capacity, but no observable difference in glycolytic capacity. The researchers conclude that BUD23 is crucial for efficient translation of mRNA transcripts with low 5'UTR GC content, and therefore plays a critical role in bioenergetics gene expression, with implications for mitochondrial disease and cardiomyopathy.
Researchers used an automated tracking system to study the flight sequences of 20 Anna's hummingbirds in a flight chamber to determine the biomechanical determinants of maneuverability. They found that burst muscle capacity was a key predictor of maneuverability, as hummingbirds with higher burst capacity flew faster and used more demanding complex turns. In contrast, body mass did not predict variation in maneuvering performance, and wing morphology predicted only the use of arcing turns and high centripetal accelerations. The study highlights the importance of understanding maneuverability in animal locomotion, as it plays a crucial role in their survival.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to generate a molecular model of the E. coli F-ATP synthase, which could help advance our understanding of the mechanism of rotary ATPases in general, according to a new report in eLife. The researchers observed three different states related to rotation of the enzyme, while the proton translocating subunit contains near parallel helices, which are inclined by roughly 30˚ to the membrane, a feature that is now identifiable with rotary ATPases. Furthermore, the peripheral stalk has been resolved over the entire length of the complex, revealing F1 attachment points and a coiled-coiled buildup that bifurcates toward the membrane.

The study examines the role of hairpin-loop-containing HSP proteins in the structure and continuity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network in axons. The loss of these proteins, caused by mutations affecting reticulon or REEP proteins, leads to hereditary spastic paraplegia, a degenerative disease of the lower limbs. The study finds that Drosophila axons contain a dynamic axonal ER network, which the HSP hairpin proteins help to organize. Loss of these proteins causes ER sheet expansion and occasional discontinuities in axonal ER. The study suggests that ER modeling is important for axon maintenance and function, and may have long-range as well as local functions. The study also identifies the ortholog relationships between the six Drosophila and six human REEP proteins and provides evidence for the differential localization of these proteins in axonal and presynaptic ER.
Researchers have identified potential drugs that may promote rod photoreceptor survival and slow the progression of inherited retinal diseases and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The study involved large-scale phenotypic drug screening of 2,934 mostly human-approved drugs in a larval zebrafish model of RP, resulting in the identification of 113 compounds as hits. Further testing of 42 high-priority hits confirmed 11 lead candidates, which were evaluated in multiple mouse RP models. Nine of the 11 leads exhibited neuroprotective effects in mouse primary photoreceptor cultures, and three promoted photoreceptor survival in mouse rd1 retinal explants. The study found shared and complementary mechanisms of action were implicated across leads and suggested combinatorial drug therapies may provide enhanced therapeutic benefits for RP patients.
The migration of small micromeres to the coelomic pouches in sea urchin embryos is an exceptional model for understanding the genomic regulatory control of morphogenesis. Using a homing assay to study the migratory behavior of small micromeres, researchers have identified a specific subcircuit of a gene regulatory network that governs effector genes responsible for the directed homing mechanism of these multipotent progenitors. This study uncovered a striking similarity between this morphogenesis gene regulatory network and the retinal determination gene network. Other cell types, such as primordial germ cells, also undergo directed migration during development, and many use different signal transduction mechanisms to remodel their actin cytoskeletons in a directed fashion to create a polarized leading edge.
The researchers have developed a chemical probe, SKI-73, that targets the cancer-relevant protein arginine methyltransferase, CARM1. SKI-73 can penetrate cell membranes and be processed into active inhibitors, which are retained intracellularly and can suppress cancer cell invasion by altering epigenetic plasticity. The authors also provide insights into the mechanism by which CARM1 regulates breast cancer metastasis. They found that SKI-73 and CARM1 knockout alter epigenetic plasticity with distinct modes of action for small-molecule and genetic perturbations. The researchers used the SAM analog sinefungin to develop 6'-homosinefungin (HSF) as a CARM1 inhibitor. They optimized HSF to develop SKI-73, a highly potent inhibitor of CARM1, and confirmed the tight binding of SKI-73 with CARM1 using orthogonal biochemical assays. The researchers also solved the X-ray structure of CARM1 in complex with SKI-73, which provides structural insights into the mechanism of action of SKI-73.
A diverse library of over 3000 monoclonal antibodies to assess the roles of extracellular loops (ECLs) in LptD, an essential Outer Membrane Protein (OMP) that inserts lipopolysaccharide into the outer membrane of Escherichia coli, has been constructed. The study elucidates the structure-function relationships governing LptD within native membrane environments. Epitope mapping experiments with LptD-loop-deletion mutants demonstrated that 7 of the 13 ECLs are targeted by antibodies. The data obtained provides unique insights into the structure and function of LptD and suggests that novel antibiotics targeting non-antibody approaches for interfering with the function of this essential OMP in E. coli should be prioritized to develop novel antibiotics.
Intermediate neural progenitor cells (INPs) are important for increasing brain size and complexity, but the mechanisms preventing their differentiation and cell cycle exit are not well understood. In this study, the Drosophila homolog of mammalian Sp8 transcription factor Buttonhead (Btd) was found to prevent premature differentiation and cell cycle exit of INPs by suppressing the expression of Prospero in immature INPs. Btd also functions cooperatively with the Ets transcription factor Pointed P1 to promote the generation of INPs. Loss of Btd eliminates mature INPs due to premature differentiation of INPs into terminally dividing ganglion mother cells, demonstrating a critical mechanism that prevents premature differentiation and cell cycle exit of Drosophila INPs.
Researchers have discovered a three-dimensional model of the Mediator complex, a 21-subunit group essential for transcription in all eukaryotes, by performing chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry, as well as using information from X-ray crystallography, homology modelling, and cryo-electron microscopy. The process may be used to determine molecular architecture of other complexes.
The study investigates the working memory capacity of carrion crows and the underlying neuronal computations in their prefrontal-like area nidopallium caudolaterale. The researchers found that the neuronal encoding and maintenance of information were affected by item load in a way that is virtually identical to results obtained from monkey prefrontal cortex. They also found that carrion crows and macaque monkeys share divisive normalization as a neuronal computation that is in line with mammalian models, indicating that computational models of working memory developed in the mammalian cortex can also apply to non-cortical associative brain regions of birds. The study provides a unique comparative perspective on working memory by including birds, which have a similar limit in working memory capacity and neuronal correlates of working memory comparable to monkeys.
The molecular force of blood-stage infection (molFOB) is a quantitative measure of malaria transmission at the population level and exposure at the individual level. In a study in Papua New Guinea, children were treated to eliminate P.vivax hypnozoites (dormant stage) before being infected with both P.falciparum and P.vivax. The study found that without relapses, children acquired equal numbers of new infections of each species resulting in comparable patterns of incidence and prevalence. However, when including relapses, Pv-molFOB increased more than threefold, showing greater individual and village-level heterogeneity. Both Pf-molFOB and Pv-molFOB were strongly associated with clinical episode risk, and the yearly clinical incidence rate for P.falciparum was higher than for P.vivax despite lower Pf-molFOB. The study highlights the changes in malaria prevalence and clinical incidence patterns with a decline in malaria transmission, and the need to identify high-risk areas.
This study examines the physical mechanisms behind the formation of actomyosin rings in eukaryotic cells during cytokinesis, specifically the role of flow-based compression and active alignment in actin filament alignment and furrow formation. Using the C.elegans zygote as a model, the researchers observed the orientation of actin filaments during pseudocleavage and cytokinesis stages using fluorescent labeling and quantifying cortical flow velocity fields. They found that flow-based compression by actomyosin drives ring formation and enhances active alignment, but is not required for ring formation. The study also characterizes the spatial distribution of molecular regulation and contractility in the equatorial region during pseudocleavage and cytokinesis.
The article discusses the discovery and characterization of gene activator proteins and their activation domains (ADs), which play an important role in transcriptional activation. A high-throughput assay was used to identify 150 ADs in yeast transcription factors, and structural modeling showed that ADs interact with the Med15 subunit of Mediator without shape complementarity (‘fuzzy’ binding). Biochemical studies of TF-coactivator interaction gave an insight into the mechanism of activation. ADs stimulate transcription of genes by recruiting coactivator complexes. The article also explores the sequence determinants, molecular interactions, and kinetic features of TF ADs. A simple neural network accurately predicted ADs in human proteins and other yeast proteins, including chromosomal proteins and chromatin remodeling complexes. The findings provide a rationale for the role of ADs in biology and could help in the development of new treatments for human diseases. Overall, the study offers a comprehensive model for the function, sequence determinants, molecular interactions, and kinetic features of TF ADs.
Researchers have discovered that activating mutations in fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 3 and inactivating mutations in the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase both cause severe short stature, but exactly how these two signalling pathways work together to regulate bone growth is unclear. Using an in vivo imaging system and growing bones from mice who cannot deactivate NPR2 in their growth plate chondrocytes in culture, the researchers discovered that FGF-induced dephosphorylation of NPR2 decreases its guanylyl cyclase activity in growth plate chondrocytes in living bone. The new findings describe a new component of the signalling network by which activating mutations in the FGF receptor inhibit bone growth.
The splicing regulator PTBP2 plays an important role in the genetic program essential for neuronal maturation, controlling the repression of adult protein isoforms until the final maturation of the neuron. Depletion of PTBP2 in developing mouse cortex leads to degeneration of these tissues over the first three postnatal weeks, during cortical expansion and the development of mature circuits. Transcriptome-wide analyses identify many exons that share a pattern of mis-regulation in mutant brains.

PTBP2 is induced as neuronal progenitors exit mitosis and begin to differentiate. Conditional gene targeting and conditional null alleles were used to examine PTBP2 function in the nervous system, which led to the absence of PTBP2 expression in neonates, resulting in a catastrophic failure in neuronal maturation and the misexpression of many protein isoforms. Embryonic brain development appeared largely normal in the absence of PTBP2, but several major axonal tracts were either absent or significantly diminished in the Ptbp2 mutant brain.
The fitness effects of mutations in bacteria depend on environmental factors, such as antibiotic concentration. Mutations that increase resistance to antibiotics may decrease fitness in the absence of antibiotics due to a tradeoff in adaptation to environmental extremes. The authors develop a mathematical model for such tradeoffs based on experiments that determine antibiotic dose-response curves of Escherichia coli strains. The model generates a succession of landscapes with predictable properties as antibiotic concentration is varied. While the landscape is nearly smooth at low and high concentrations, the tradeoff induces high ruggedness at intermediate concentrations. However, all fitness maxima in the landscapes are evolutionarily accessible from the wild type. The paper explores the structure of such landscapes in the presence of tradeoffs between fitness and resistance and analyzes the properties of mutational pathways leading to highly fit genotypes. By understanding tradeoff-induced landscapes, researchers can predict the emergence of compensatory mutations and the acquisition of multiple resistance mutations.
Researchers investigated the lateral cerebellum in mammals to determine whether convergent evolution of mammalian cognitive capacities is scaffolded by modifications of the common neural system. Through the study of the evolutionary diversification of the mammalian cerebellum, the researchers found that multiple independent occurrences of increased behavioral complexity in mammals may be explained by selection on a common neural system, the cerebellum, which may have been subject to multiple independent neurodevelopmental remodeling events during mammalian evolution. The results suggest a convergence in the lateral-medial cerebellar reorganization among distantly related mammalian lineages.
The InsectBrainDatabase (IBdb) is a free online platform designed to facilitate access to neuroanatomical and functional data related to insects. The IBdb is designed to enable cross-species comparisons and link neural structure with function, serving as a general information hub for insect neuroscience. The platform allows users to effectively locate and visualize data, and make them widely available for easy automated reuse through an API. A unique private mode is also available for managing, visualizing, and sharing unpublished data, expanding the functionality beyond public data deposition. The IBdb is designed to address challenges related to the vast amounts of diverse data generated by insect neuroscience, with the aim of promoting an open data culture. The platform is organized into three hierarchical layers: Species, brain structures, and neuron types, and is accessible via an intuitive graphical interface that facilitates cross-species searches.
RAs (retinoic acids) produced by Aldh1a1 in the neural retina stimulate the RPE (retinal pigment epithelial) cells to enhance VEGF secretion into the choroid, which is then responsible for choroidal vascular development in the retina, according to an article in eLife. RAs are essential for biological activities including development and growth, and the retina's primary nutrient source is the choroid. Previous research has identified VEGF secreted from RPE cells as being indispensable for the vascular development and maintenance of the choroid, but the regulatory mechanism of VEGF secretion from the RPE has not been fully understood. The article details the authors' experiments using Aldh1a1 knockout mice.
Fungi use LysM effectors to prevent recognition of cell wall-derived chitin by host immune receptors, but the mechanism involved in the binding competition remained unclear. However, structural analysis of the LysM effector Ecp6 of the fungal tomato pathogen Cladosporium fulvum has recently revealed a novel mechanism involving intrachain LysM dimerization that leads to a chitin-binding groove in the effector protein. This composite binding site involves two of the three LysMs of Ecp6 and mediates chitin binding with an ultra-high affinity. Conversely, the remaining singular LysM domain of Ecp6 binds chitin with low micromolar affinity but can still perturb chitin-triggered immunity, not through chitin sequestration but by possibly interfering with the host immune receptor complex. The evolutionary and ecological diversity of fungi (causative agents of plant diseases) suggests a fundamental role of chitin scavenging in fungal pathogenicity taken over by LysM effectors.
The study aims to understand the differences in gene regulation between humans and lower mammalian experimental systems, and how this affects the ability to study the physiology of neurons. The researchers compared activity-dependent transcriptional responses in developing human stem cell-derived cortical neurons with those induced in developing mouse cortical neurons. While there was little dependence on developmental stage or origin, they observed notable species-dependent differences, implicating promoter/enhancer sequence divergence as a factor, including human-specific activity-responsive AP-1 sites. These findings support the use of human neuronal systems for studying transcriptional responses to physiological stimuli or pharmaceutical agents. Species-specific differences in neuronal gene activity-responsiveness were observed, which suggest that stem cell origin does not account for these differences but are due to other factors, such as DNA sequence divergence.
The document discusses the relationship between cellular redox signals, circadian clocks, and the transcription factor NRF2. The circadian clock is a timekeeping mechanism that allows organisms to anticipate and adapt to environmental changes. The circadian clock is composed of a core transcription-translation feedback loop that is regulated by various clock-controlled output genes. One of the key transcription factors that control circadian gene expression is NRF2, which is regulated by oxidative signaling. The activity of NRF2 is antagonized by a cytoplasmic repressor called KEAP1. Activators of NRF2 relieve NRF2 from KEAP1-mediated repression through the oxidation or covalent modification of KEAP1 cysteine residues. In addition, the symmetrical expression of clock genes is characterized by a peak of Generation of Endogenous ROS signals, which NRF2 reinforces to increase circadian amplitude. Overall, NRF2 and the circadian clock are interlocked loops that integrate cellular redox signals into tissue-specific circadian timekeeping.
Researchers have uncovered important new information about the way that HIV spreads in the body. Scientists from the University of California and the University of North Carolina have identified the atomic structure of a key part of the virus. Specifically, they discovered the way in which the "Rev" protein helps to transport other proteins contained within the virus through cell walls in the body, to its ultimate destination in the human immune system. This is a potentially significant discovery, as treatments could soon be created that target the transportation element of this process.
Researchers have used a novel approach to examine changes in neural circuitry in individuals with congenital prosopagnosia (CP) - a condition where people have difficulty recognizing faces - compared to matched controls. The team used a technique called inter-subject functional correlation (ISFC) to isolate stimulus-locked inter-regional correlation patterns, which allowed them to explore possible alterations in connectivity across large areas of the cortex in an assumption-free manner rather than focusing on a predetermined subset of regions and connections. They found that while the anterior temporal lobe served as the major network hub for face processing in controls, this was not the case for individuals with CP, who instead exhibited hyper-connectivity in posterior regions of the visual cortex, primarily associated with the lateral occipital and the inferior temporal cortices. The extent of this hyper-connectivity was correlated with the face recognition deficit. The study offers new insights into the perturbed cortical topology in CP, which may serve as the underlying neural basis of the behavioral deficits typical of this disorder. The approach adopted here has the potential to uncover altered topologies in other neurodevelopmental disorders as well.
This study investigates how T cells control the methionine cycle to produce methyl donors for protein and nucleotide methylations in order to support rapid clonal expansion and differentiation during immune activation. The data show that sustained external supply of methionine is essential for T cell activation and differentiation as it drives T cell proliferation and produces the key methyl donors S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) necessary for DNA, RNA, histone, and protein methylation. Activation of the T cell antigen receptor controls flux through the methionine cycle, and the main rate-limiting step is the expression of methionine transporters. The study also shows that methionine availability is rate-limiting for T cell activation and differentiation and that a constant sustained external supply of methionine is needed. Methionine availability is also linked to RNA methylation on lysine residues and is essential for IFNγ production by Th1 cells.
MiRNAs play important roles in embryonic development, but their postnatal functions are still poorly understood due to their redundant paralogs. MiR34/449 is a family of six homologous miRNAs that exhibit a dynamic expression pattern in the spinal cord during development. To study their function, Mir34bc/449 DKO and Mir34/449 TKO mouse models were generated, and behavioral tests revealed that the loss of MiR34/449 miRNAs resulted in abnormal postures and hypersensitivity to thermal pain. Mechanistically, MiR34/449 fine-tunes development of Satb1/2on interneurons in the spinal cord, which contribute to altered sensory-motor responses. MiR34/449 is highly expressed in neural tissues, with MiR34a-5p exhibiting the highest expression level in the spinal cord.
The UNC-13/Munc13 family of proteins are essential for synaptic vesicle exocytosis in synapses. The C2A domain of Caenorhabditis elegans UNC-13 has been identified as regulating release probability of evoked release and its precise active zone localisation. Its proximity to Ca2+ entry sites is critical for accelerating neurotransmitter release. The C2A domain is also specifically required for spontaneous release. The UNC-13L long isoform is the most abundant form and enables both fast and slow release. The short isoform UNC-13S is required for the slow release. The inactivation of the C2A domain of UNC-13L ameliorates behavioural deficits in a C.elegans model for epileptic seizures. The study demonstrates that the distance between UNC-13/Munc13 and the Ca2+ entry site, mediated by the C2A-domain containing N-terminus, plays a critical role in SV release probability and release kinetics.
Yan is a transcription factor that plays a role in maintaining Drosophila eye cells in a multipotent state and is involved in determining the transitions of cells to different lineages. The levels of Yan expression in multipotent cells are biphasic, and transitions to differentiated states occur during this dynamic process, indicating that Yan expression levels do not determine cell potential. Heterogeneity in Yan expression becomes highly transient during cell differentiation. Dynamic heterogeneity of Yan is essential for cell state transitions in the Drosophila eye. Yan has a monostable response to transient stimuli with no stable steady state within progenitor cells, and cell transitions into a differentiated state occur at varying levels of Yan-YFP depending on the differentiated state being adopted. Yan noise reduction stabilizes cell states. Signals from the EGF receptor are necessary for the transient expression of Yan noise.
The Base Excision Repair (BER) process has been found to not only maintain genomic integrity but also play a role in epigenetic gene regulation and DNA demethylation. The study focuses on the role of bifunctional DNA glycosylases/lyases NEIL1 and NEIL2which act in repair of oxidative lesions and in epigenetic demethylation. Deficiency of these enzymes leads to accumulation of oxidative DNA damage in mitochondrial DNA-specific to the neural crest, leading to specific lineage defects during embryonic development. The study demonstrates how impaired removal of oxidative lesions and heightened ROS levels can lead to Tp53-dependent DNA damage response (DDR), which induces apoptosis and impairs an early cNCC specification. The spatial restriction of the DDR may be related to patterned expression of tp53 itself, as high-level expression of tp53 is found in the embryonic CNS.
Research has identified that a particular axis, the PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1, is an attractive pathway for therapeutic inhibition in osteosarcoma (OS) and that targeting this axis could reveal therapeutic targets that may spare normal cells with intact p53. The activation of the PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1 axis is required for the hyperproliferative phenotype of Trp53 deficient osteoblasts and for the maintenance of established OS. The consequences of P53 loss for osteoblastic cells and OS development are not well-understood. Genomic rearrangements and other mutation types most often result in null alleles of P53 in OS, and activating and inactivating mutations within cAMP related pathways are widespread. Thus, links to enhanced cAMP-PKA activity in OS suggest that these pathways are important in OS initiation and maintenance.
A study was conducted to investigate the relationship between multisensory integration and trial-by-trial recalibration and whether they are linked to a common neural substrate. Whole brain magnetoencephalography was used to measure activity while participants performed a spatial localization task. The results revealed activity within the superior parietal cortex encoded current multisensory information and retained information from preceding trials, and used both to guide adaptive behavior within and across trials. They also found that previous multisensory stimuli had a lasting influence on the localization of subsequent sounds. These results highlight a common neural substrate of sensory integration and perceptual recalibration, and reveal a role of medial parietal regions in linking present and previous multisensory evidence to guide adaptive behavior.
The document describes the structure and function of Norrin, a growth factor involved in Wnt signalling. Norrin activates the Wnt/β-catenin pathway by binding with Wnt receptor Frizzled4 cysteine-rich domain, co-receptor low density lipoprotein receptor related protein 5/6 ectodomain and the auxiliary protein Tetraspanin-12. Mutations in the genes encoding Norrin and the receptors have been identified for vitreoretinal diseases. The authors report crystallographic and small-angle X-ray scattering analyses of Norrin in complex with Frizzled4 cysteine-rich domain, and detail the structural and functional properties of potential therapeutic agents for blocking Wnt receptor activation.
Researchers have discovered that linking repair templates to the Cas9 complex, which induces DSB, can lead to an increase in correction efficiency. By covalently linking the donor template and Cas9, the correction rates increased up to 24-fold due to an increase in donor template concentration in the nucleus. This has potential advantages for clinical applications where high-fidelity repair is desired. The researchers tested their approach on different loci, including HBB and EMX1, in different cell types, and found the mean correction efficiencies were significantly increased. The results suggest that linking the repair template to the Cas9 complex can significantly improve correction efficiency compared to the unlinked control system.
Researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, have developed a new method for large-scale DNA library delivery to cells to make barcoded, pooled screening possible. The procedure uses a site-specific integration strategy to create a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen in Drosophila S2R+ cells. A total of 1,235 genes were essential for cell fitness, representing the highest-resolution fitness gene set yet assembled for Drosophila. Of these, 303 of the genes were uncharacterised in Drosophila. The system can be used with drug perturbation to identify genes that buffer cells against the drug or act synergistically with it.
The study investigates two distinct regulation mechanisms - autophosphorylation and TPX2-mediated activation - in human Aurora A kinase. The authors determine that autophosphorylation is important in the centrosomes in the early stages of mitosis, while allosteric activation by TPX2 of dephosphorylated Aurora A could be at play in the spindle microtubules. The study also resolves the controversy over the mechanism of autophosphorylation by demonstrating intermolecular autophosphorylation in a long-lived dimer. TPX2 increases the kinetics of the dephosphorylated protein mimic of Aurora A, T288V mutant towards the peptides AP, Kemptide, and Lats2373-387 between 20- and 30-fold. TPX21-45 drastically accelerates the kinetics of the dephosphorylated-like Aurora A species irrespective of the nature of the peptide used.
The document describes a study on the cellular basis of limb development in the Parhyale hawaiensis crustacean using multi-view light-sheet microscopy and a new software called MaMuT for lineage reconstruction at single-cell resolution. The study also discusses the challenges in understanding morphogenesis and the advantages of using LSFM technology to capture dynamic processes at high spatiotemporal resolution. The document details the development of MaMuT and its capabilities for tracking and lineage reconstruction in large multi-dimensional microscopy data. The use of MaMuT on Parhyale embryos allowed for the identification and tracking of all constituent cells in developing limbs and the validation of cellular models of morphogenesis through the study of developmental regulatory genes implicated in limb patterning and growth.
The transition zone (TZ) is a critical structure within cilia and flagella that regulates their assembly and function. Dysfunctions in cilia and flagella can lead to life-threatening diseases known as ciliopathies. This study identifies the Drosophila Dzip1 and Fam92 proteins as forming a functional module that is essential to constrain the core TZ protein, Cep290, at the ciliary base. The study shows that Dzip1 and Fam92 are required for TZ assembly in all Drosophila ciliated cells and regulate basal-body growth and docking to the plasma membrane during spermatogenesis. The study reveals a novel regulatory role for Dzip1 and Fam92 in mediating membrane/basal-body interactions and shows that these interactions exhibit cell type-specific functions in basal-body maturation and TZ organization.
A study has identified a eukaryotic hypermutator lineage in the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus deuterogattii, which increases mutation rates in typical genes and those containing homopolymer runs, allowing the inactivation of specific genes including FRR1. The study suggests that pathogenic eukaryotic microbes may experience similar selection pressures on mutation rate as bacterial pathogens, particularly during long periods of clonal growth or while expanding into new environments. The presence of sex abrogates selection for hypermutator strains by eliminating genetic linkage between the mutator allele and the associated beneficial mutations it hitchhikes upon to high frequency.
The role of P21-activated kinase 2 (Pak2) in the development and maturation of thymocytes (a type of white blood cell involved in the immune system) was explored in mice. T-cell specific deletion of the Pak2 gene resulted in severe T-cell lymphopenia (reduced number of T cells) and defects in development, maturation, and egress of thymocytes. Pak2 was found to be required for pre-TCR β-selection and positive selection, and was necessary for actin cytoskeletal remodeling triggered by TCR. The absence of Pak2 impaired the expression of S1P1 and KLF2, critical components for the egress of T cells from the thymus. These findings reveal the important role of Pak2 as an essential regulator that governs the actin cytoskeleton-dependent signaling for normal thymocyte development and maturation.
This article discusses the connections between the two sides of the auditory pathway in the brain. The inferior colliculi (ICs), which are responsible for auditory processing, are interconnected by a commissure. By deactivating one IC in guinea pigs and measuring neural activity to sound in the other, the authors found that commissural input influences fundamental aspects of auditory processing. The deactivation affected nonV frequency response areas (FRAs), but not V-shaped FRAs. This suggests the ICs should be viewed as a single entity in which the representation of sound in each is governed by the other. The findings also demonstrate that the two sides of the auditory midbrain operate collectively rather than independently of one another.
The Fbxo21 protein, a part of the SCF complex, has been shown to be essential in promoting type I interferon production and Lys29-linkage of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), which is important in the antiviral innate response of macrophages. Fbxo21 deficiency inhibits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and interferon, resulting in reduced antiviral defence and enhanced viral replication. The study suggests that Fbxo21 facilitates non-proteolytic Ub-modification of ASK1, providing insight into our mechanistic understanding of the antiviral innate response.
The article discusses how mutations in the amyloid beta peptide, which is associated with Alzheimer's disease, affect the formation of amyloid fibrils. The study used deep mutational scanning to quantify the effects of over 14,000 mutations on the aggregation of amyloid beta. The resulting genetic landscape revealed mechanistic insights into fibril nucleation, including the importance of charge and gatekeeper residues in the disordered region outside of the amyloid core in preventing nucleation. The empirical nucleation scores accurately identified all known dominant familial forms of Alzheimer's disease mutations in the amyloid beta peptide. The study also provides the first comprehensive map of how mutations alter the formation of any amyloid fibril and a resource for the interpretation of genetic variation in amyloid beta.
Scientists have developed a new algorithm called DISC which accelerates the analysis of single-molecule trajectories obtained from high-throughput experiments. The algorithm uses model-free statistical learning with the Viterbi algorithm to idealize single-molecule trajectories up to three orders of magnitude faster with improved accuracy compared to other commonly used algorithms. The DISC algorithm was successfully tested on a large single-molecule dataset obtained from ZMWs exploring HCN dynamics, where it successfully processed the entire dataset within 20 minutes using a standard MacBook Air. Overall, the algorithm is expected to be an enabling technology for the analysis of high-throughput single-molecule experiments.
Semen contains amyloid fibrils which enhance HIV infection, but their natural function was unclear. This study found that the fibrils immobilize sperm, inhibiting fertilization, but also facilitate the removal of low-quality sperm by macrophages. These findings suggest that the amyloid fibrils in semen may play a role in sperm selection and disposal. The ability of semen amyloids to enhance HIV infection means they are being targeted for HIV microbicide development. The study also found that endogenous amyloids in semen associated with spermatozoa and efficiently entrapped sperm, suggesting they serve a physiological purpose.
This article reports on a study into the developmental process of dorsal closure in the scuttle fly Megaselia abdita, comparing it to the process in Drosophila melanogaster. The authors found that while the two insects have different morphological arrangements for dorsal closure, they use the same signaling pathways. In Megaselia abdita, the process involves the rupture, contraction, and microtubule-dependent seaming of the serosa and amnion, eventually forming a fused epidermis. The study also sheds light on the interplay between tissue mechanics and genetics in the evolution of developmental processes.
This document discusses the activation of B cells upon the binding of antigen to the BCR. The process by which the BCR becomes signaling-competent upon antigen binding is still a matter of controversy. Using a high-resolution proximity ligation assay (PLA) to monitor the conformation of the BCR and its interactions with co-receptors at a 10-20nm resolution, the authors demonstrate direct evidence for the opening of BCR dimers during B cell activation. They also show that upon binding Syk phosphorylating both ITAM tyrosines and subsequently binds the ppITAM via its tandem SH2 domains. The resulting increased Syk recruitment generates a positive feedback that amplifies signal transduction from the BCR. Additionally, the study shows that the coreceptor CD19 is in close proximity with the IgD-BCR on resting B cells and on activated B cells with the IgM-BCR, implying nanoscale reorganization of receptor clusters during B cell activation. The study explores the nanoscale organization of the BCR at a 10-20nm resolution with a modified version of PLA. The findings suggest the Fab-PLA specifically detects oligomeric forms of IgM be it the soluble IgM pentamer or the oligomeric IgM-BCR on the B cell surface.
Meiotic recombination, which involves the programmed creation and repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs), can lead to chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy if the process goes awry. Recent studies have identified a group of proteins called Zip3 that are required for the selection of those DSBs that will become competent for crossover formation, preventing chromosome missegregation. However, not all organisms possess all Zip3 proteins, and before this study, no homologs for most of the proteins required for DSB fate determination had been identified in Drosophila. This study describes the identification of a new meiosis-specific Drosophila gene, named vilya, that encodes a Zip3-like RING-containing protein required for programmed DSB formation. Vilya interacts with Mei-P22, another DSB accessory protein, and both localize to sites of DSBs as identified by the chromatin modification ?H2AV. When an epitope-tagged version of Vilya is expressed in the female germline, it shows a dynamic localization pattern dependent on DSB formation. As the oocyte matures into early/mid-pachytene, Vilya is primarily found at discrete foci. The number and distribution of these foci along the euchromatic synaptonemal complex of each chromosome arm parallels the number and position of crossover events. In fact, Vilya is shown to be a component of recombination nodules by immuno-electron microscopy, making it the first RN protein component identified in Drosophila. These findings suggest that Vilya has functions that have recently been described for several members of the Zip3 group, such as DSB fate determination and crossover formation.
Researchers have established a synthetic community of three human gut isolates to explore their interactions under controlled laboratory conditions. They found competition for fructose and cross-feeding of formate, and that strains grown in co-culture behaved differently to those in mono-culture, which altered their behaviour at the transcriptional level. They also showed that dominance in tri-culture was dependent on the initial conditions, and that further in vitro investigation is crucial to understand the interactions of gut species and how they can shape community dynamics. The findings are important for gut microbial community modelling and detection of ecosystem interactions from batch cultures.
Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) induces caspase-dependent apoptotic neurodegeneration in the brain of its insect vector, the whitefly, which leads to sensory defects and a loss of host preference in the whitefly. This enhances the probability of TYLCV entering uninfected hosts and eventually spreading among the plant community. TYLCV virions directly induced Caspase3b cleavage in whitefly, and TYLCV infection had substantial effects on the nervous system of whitefly. Plant viruses may directly manipulate insect vectors to induce behavioural changes through olfactory signalling, inducing immune activation and nervous system dysfunction. The study provides a neuromechanism for virus transmission to modify its associated insect vector behaviour.
The Frank-Starling relation is a property of the heart that matches the volume of blood ejected in each heartbeat to the extent of venous filling. At the cellular level, heart muscle cells generate higher force when stretched, but the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. A fluorescence-based method was used to elucidate the mechanism. The results show that the enhanced force observed when heart muscle cells are maximally activated by calcium is due to a change in thick filament structure, while the increase in calcium sensitivity at lower calcium levels is due to a change in thin filament structure. The myofilament length-dependent activation (LDA) is two-fold: with an increase in sarcomere length (SL), there are increases in the maximum force developed by the myofilaments at high Ca2+ and their sensitivity to Ca2+. Impaired LDA and a defective Frank-Starling relationship may contribute to the pathogenesis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Understanding the molecular mechanism of LDA involved measuring the structural changes in the thin and thick filaments. Increases in SL resulted in increases in maximum Ca2+-activated force and Ca sensitivity. The orientation of troponin in the thin filaments was measured, and it was discovered that force-generating myosin heads sensitise the thin filament to calcium. The research suggests that titin-based passive tension in the heart muscle cells plays an important role in LDA.
The striatum and the subthalamic nucleus (STN) are part of the basal ganglia network and regulate downstream structures with GABA and glutamate. In Parkinson's disease, there is abnormal low beta activity in the BG network due to dopamine depletion in the striatum. However, stimulation of the STN can abolish the abnormal oscillations and restore normal activity. This study recorded neuronal activity in the BG network of two monkeys engaged in a classical temporal discounting conditioning task in a normal state and after inducing Parkinson's symptoms with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). The study found that the activity fluctuations in the STN correlated with the increase/decrease discharge balance of BG downstream neurons, indicating the role of STN in BG physiology and pathophysiology. The study sheds light on the relative influence of striatum and STN activity in the BG network and how dopamine depletion in the striatum impacts the BG network in Parkinson's disease.
Type I collagen-containing fibrils are important structural components of vertebrate tissues, particularly tendons, but how they are formed is not fully understood. This study shows that tendon development is arrested in mice lacking MMP14, a collagenase that releases collagen fibrils from the plasma membrane of fibripositors during embryonic tissue formation. MMP14 is also involved in cancer cell invasion and embryonic development, and mice deficient in MMP14 die with connective tissue abnormalities. Without MMP14, collagen fibrils are retained by fibripositors and tendon development stops, resulting in smaller and weaker tendons. The study proposes a model for cell-regulated collagen fibril assembly during tendon development, in which MMP14 cleaves a molecular bridge tethering collagen fibrils to the plasma membrane of fibripositors.
A small set of regulatory elements appears to be responsible for the genetic control of regulatory T cells (Tregs), according to a study in eLife. Researchers compared epigenetic features of Tregs in mice and humans in order to better understand the inter-individual epigenetic variation that dictates Treg function. They concluded that variants in Treg cell-specific enhancers can alter Treg function and may contribute to polygenic disease.
This study challenges the misconception that evolution is a linear 'march of progress' where each organism along a line of descent is more fit than its predecessors. The study identifies a nontransitive evolutionary sequence in a yeast evolution experiment where adaptation in the yeast nuclear genome and the deterioration of an intracellular virus provide an advantage over viral competitors within host cells, resulting in nontransitivity. The study also finds that nearly half of the ~140 populations experienced multilevel selection, fixing adaptive mutations in both the nuclear and viral genomes. This study sheds light on the power of ecological nontransitivity as a driver and maintainer of diversity and has implications for our understanding of evolutionary processes.
A team of researchers at the Netherlands Cancer Institute have revealed a new screening method that can quantify the activity levels of DNA in yeast strands with potential use in human data analysis. The strategy, which uses "Epi-ID," allows investigators to directly assess chromatin status in up to thousands of yeast mutants, by which chromatin status on DNA barcodes is interrogated by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing, allowing for quantitative comparison of mutants in parallel.

This study investigates the role of the Pan1 protein in regulating the interaction between endocytic vesicles and actin cables. Pan1 is negatively regulated by Ark1 and Prk1 kinases, and previous research has shown that a mutated form of Pan1, Pan1-15TA, causes an endocytic defect and abnormal cytoplasmic actin concentrations. In this study, a new mutated form of Pan1, Pan1-18TA, was created to prevent phosphorylation at all 18 threonines. Cells expressing this mutated protein displayed almost the same endocytic defect as ark1Δ prk1Δ cells, and early endosomes were highly localized in the actin concentrations and displayed movement along actin cables. The dephosphorylated form of Pan1p also caused stable associations between endocytic vesicles and actin cables, and between endocytic vesicles and endosomes. Overall, the study suggests that Pan1 phosphorylation is part of a novel mechanism that regulates endocytic compartment interactions with each other and with actin cables.
The protein KSR1 and the signaling pathway ERK promote a cellular process called the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is key to tumor pathogenesis. KSR1-dependent induction of EMT-like phenotype via translation of mRNA reveals its underappreciated role in remodeling the translational landscape of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells to promote their migratory and invasive behavior. EPSTI1 is a protein that is overexpressed in human CRC cells and is necessary for inducing the switch from E- to N-cadherin and coordinating migratory and invasive behavior. Disruption of KSR1 or EPSTI1 reverses EMT-like phenotype, in part by decreasing the expression of N-cadherin and transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin. KSR1-dependent induction of EPSTI1 shows how ERK-regulated regulation of mRNA translation is an essential contributor to EMT-like phenotype and the invasive behavior of cells.
Research in house mice has helped map the genetic buttons responsible for the reproductive barriers that arise as populations become separate species. By identifying the genomic regions responsible for the reproductive incompatibilities, scientists can achieve a better understanding of how speciation works. The study of house mice has been particularly useful because of hybrid zones between the three subspecies of house mice that exist in Europe. While laboratory crosses have identified some sterility loci, each implicated hundreds of genes. In natural populations, the mapping of the reproductive barrier traits has been limited by the challenges of collecting dense genome-wide genetic markers. However, new research identifies genomic regions contributing to reproductive isolation using mouse hybrids that were captured in a hybrid zone between the subspecies &lsquo;M. musculus musculus&rsquo; and &lsquo;M. m. domesticus&rsquo;. The research found that high-resolution mapping of loci contributed to the sterility-related phenotypes that occur in male hybrids.
The clathrin adaptor complex AP2 is a tetrameric protein complex involved in the process of endocytosis. This complex consists of four subunits, and it is generally believed to act as an obligate tetramer. Mutations in either alpha (α) or mu2 (μ2) subunits disrupt endocytosis at the plasma membrane. Recent studies suggest that α-adaptin may be essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis, whereas the μ2 subunit may not be essential. In C. elegans, α-adaptin mutants are viable, and the remaining μ2/β hemicomplex retains some function. Conversely, in μ2 mutants, the alpha/sigma2 hemicomplex is localized and is partially functional. The lethality in α-μ2 double mutants can be rescued by expression of AP2 components in the skin. Simultaneous loss of both α and μ2 subunits leads to a 70% reduction in synaptic vesicles and the presence of large vacuoles, suggesting that AP2 may function as two partially independent hemicomplexes. Furthermore, α- and μ2-adaptin mutants exhibit similar but distinct phenotypes, suggesting that the functions of these subunits may not be identical. The phenotype of the double mutant is synthetic, and the rare escapers grow slowly and are sick and dumpy. These data suggest that residual function of AP2 remains in both α and μ2 single mutants.
Exploratory filopodia, the finger-like membrane extensions of dendritic branches, help form multi-cellular neuronal networks by increasing the probability that selective pre-to-postsynaptic connections are established. The frequency of filopodia formation drops once the high synapse density is established, suggesting the initiation of these structures is controlled by opposing negative regulators. ArhGAP44, a membrane curvature-sensing GTPase Activating Protein (GAP) selective for the small Rho GTPases Rac1, was found to limit the initiation of exploratory dendritic filopodia. The brain-enriched protein recruits to nanoscale membrane deformations, reducing local actin polymerization due to Rac GAP activity, and preventing the formation of filopodia. ArhGAP44 expression increases as the network of neurons is established, suggesting that the protein facilitates the transition of neurons from a dynamic exploratory mode to a more mature, static state that is a hallmark of nervous system development.
Mice lacking the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) decrease their feeding and food anticipatory behaviour (FAA) in response to daytime, but not nighttime, restricted feeding. These effects result in increased weight loss but do not require p75NTR during development. P75NTR is required for fasting-induced activation of neurons within the arcuate hypothalamus and specifically within AgRP neurons is required for FAA in response to daytime restricted feeding. These findings establish p75NTR as a novel regulator gating behavioural response to food scarcity and time-of-day dependence of circadian food anticipation.
Cellular senescence contributes to intervertebral disc degeneration and low back pain. RG-7112, a mouse double-minute two protein inhibitor, selectively kills senescent IVD cells through apoptosis. Gene expression pathway analysis was used to compare RG-7112 to o-Vanillin, a natural and anti-inflammatory senolytic. Both drugs affected functional gene networks related to cell death and survival. Both senolytics effectively decreased the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) of IVD cells. The drugs were verified ex vivo in the physiological environment of degenerating intact human discs, where a single dose improved disc matrix homeostasis. RG-7112 was found to kill senescent annulus fibrosus (AF) and nucleus pulposus (NP) cells, while o-Vanillin reduced inflammatory factors. Gene expression analysis of 96 cellular senescence genes showed that o-Vanillin and RG-7112 activated apoptotic pathways in senescent cells, while proliferation-related pathways were activated in non-senescent cells. Both drugs were shown to affect networks related to connective tissue development and function.
Floral temperature patterns, created by captured sunlight or plant thermogenesis, may represent a new floral cue that could assist pollinators in the recognition and learning of rewarding flowers. Bumblebees can distinguish artificial flowers differing in temperature patterns comparable to those seen in real flowers. Bumblebees are able to perceive the shape of within-flower temperature patterns. Understanding whether pollinators can detect temperature patterns within the flower will improve our understanding of how pollinators interact with flowers and how floral displays have evolved. Bumblebees were presented with artificial flowers on which differing temperature patterns had been created. Bumblebees learnt to identify rewarding flowers when they differed in temperature patterns.
Researchers have identified a new therapeutic target for Parkinson's disease in the form of the protein MUL1. MUL1 acts in parallel with the PINK1/parkin pathway to maintain mitochondrial integrity, compensate for the loss of PINK1 and parkin, and suppress Parkinson's disease mutant phenotypes in both Drosophila and mammals. The study found that MUL1 suppresses PINK1 or parkin mutant phenotypes through the degradation of Mitofusin, which is itself toxic when overexpressed. The findings suggest that MUL1 is a promising therapeutic target for Parkinson's disease.
Imbalances in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can lead to degenerative diseases associated with protein misfolding and aggregation. One potential strategy to treat these diseases is through activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), specifically the ATF6 transcriptional program. Researchers used a screening approach to identify small molecules that mimic the ER proteostasis reprogramming achieved through activation of the ATF6 transcriptional program. These molecules, dependent on endogenous ATF6, were able to reduce the secretion and extracellular aggregation of amyloidogenic proteins associated with these degenerative diseases. The screening strategy included a cell-based high-throughput screen (HTS) and transcriptional profiling to identify non-toxic small molecules that preferentially activate the ATF6 transcriptional program independent of global UPR activation. The top 281 compounds were counterscreened to identify those which preferentially activate the ATF6 transcriptional program independent of global ER stress.
Researchers have discovered that doxorubicin stimulates the production of ceramide, which leads to the activation of CREB3L1, a transcription factor that inhibits the cell cycle. This finding suggests that measuring the expression of CREB3L1 may be useful for identifying cancer cells sensitive to doxorubicin, which is used to treat various types of cancer. The study also found that doxorubicin-induced proteolytic activation of CREB3L1 is required for the drug to inhibit cancer cell proliferation. These findings may provide an effective strategy to overcome drug resistance in cancer treatment.
Jasmonates are plant hormones that regulate plant defenses against herbivores. This study found that jasmonate-deficient Nicotiana attenuata plants, which produce less nicotine, suffer more damage from herbivores, particularly vertebrates such as rabbits, than jasmonate-producing plants in nature, and this leads to a reduction in flower production. Endogenous jasmonates enable plants to resist different types of herbivores in nature, and jasmonate-dependent defenses are important for plants to maintain their reproductive potential when facing vertebrate herbivory. Most plant defenses are regulated by jasmonates, but the fitness benefits of endogenous jasmonate production in herbivore-attacked plants in natural environments have not been demonstrated so far.
MiR-31 is a microRNA that plays a critical role in intestinal stem cell (ISC) biology and is a potential therapeutic target for intestinal regenerative disorders and cancers. It drives ISC proliferation and protects ISCs against apoptosis during regeneration in response to ionizing radiation injury, and has oncogenic properties, promoting intestinal tumorigenesis. MiR-31 acts to balance input from Wnt, BMP, and TGFβ signals to coordinate control of intestinal homeostasis, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. The expression of miR-31 is highest in Lgr5-GFPhigh crypt base columnar stem cells and intermediate in Lgr5-GFPlow transit-amplifying cells. Its loss leads to a reduction in crypt height with fewer proliferative cells and increased apoptosis, while its induction leads to expansion of intestinal crypts and accelerated differentiation of specialized intestinal cell types.
This document discusses the need for a better understanding of the physiological and behavioral responses to noxious stimuli in animals and humans, in order to progress in pain research. It describes the rapid and complex motor program that is initiated in response to nociception in awake, unrestrained animals, with a focus on the fine-grained analysis of sensory-motor integrative responses to nociceptive stimuli. The study reveals a potent gating mechanism, partially dependent on the endogenous opioid system, which inhibits the withdrawal response to noxious stimuli when animals are standing on their hindlimbs. The results provide new, largely unexplored behavioral endpoints that can be used for assessment of acute nociceptive stimuli, effects of pharmacological treatments, modification of circuits by genetic manipulations, and how more chronic manipulations or models affect spinal excitability and the integrated sensory-motor response to noxious test stimuli. The inhibitory component of the nociceptive-motor gate exerts potent control over nociceptive inputs and is activated in partially opioid-dependent and non-opioid-dependent mechanisms.
A new study has shown that microbial communities inside animals affect their behaviour, even more than the individual species of microbes themselves. Researchers studied Drosophila melanogaster and found the insect preferred a co-culture of Saccharomyces-Acetobacter to the same microorganisms grown individually and then mixed. When the researchers explored why, they found the Acetobacter metabolism was necessary for the preference. Egg-laying behaviour, which is normally vital to the resulting larvae, also benefited from the co-culture.
Insect embryos have extraembryonic tissues - the amnion and serosa - that actively rupture and withdraw in late embryogenesis, unlike the passive rupture of the human chorioamnion at birth. A new fluorescent transgenic line has allowed scientists to study the withdrawal process and shows that the amnion initiates the rupture in the beetle Tribolium casteneum. The amnion and serosa form a basa-basal epithelial bilayer, enabling the amnion to coordinate with the serosa to withdraw the tissues. The process of embryogenesis requires dynamic interaction between tissues to create changing three-dimensional configurations, culminating in the completion of the body.
Abnormalities in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling can cause birth defects and cancers such as medulloblastoma, the most common pediatric brain tumor. Currently, treatment for medulloblastoma involves surgical removal followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy, but often leads to devastating neurocognitive consequences. The use of inhibitors targeting the membrane protein Smoothened, which suppress Hh signaling, has been limited due to drug resistance and tumor relapse. This study identified a new therapeutic target, phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D), which acts downstream of neuropilins to control Hh transduction and medulloblastoma growth. Sema3, a member of a secreted ligand family, enhances Hh signaling through the activation of PDE4D, which reduces intracellular cAMP levels through hydrolysis and promotes Hh transduction. Furthermore, genetic removal of neuropilins severely impairs granule neuron precursor proliferation and inhibiting PDE4D suppresses the growth of Hh-related medulloblastoma. This discovery will help to develop Nrp-related therapeutics for Hh-related tumors, such as medulloblastoma.
Researchers have discovered a yeast on the surface of leaves that may help protect plants from pathogens. The epiphytic yeast, Moesziomyces bullatus ex Albugo, a close relative of pathogenic smut fungi, reduces infection of Arabidopsis thaliana by the oomycete pathogen Albugo laibachii. This was identified through a combination of transcriptomics, reverse genetics and protein characterisation. The find broadens understanding of microbial interactions within the phyllosphere, provides insights into the evolution of epiphytic basidiomycete yeasts and could pave the way for novel biocontrol strategies.
The rubber hand illusion (RHI) is an experiment in which an artificial hand is made to feel like a part of the subject's own body while the real hand is left "disembodied." Researchers discovered that during the RHI, the amplitude of the motor-evoked potentials recorded from the real (disembodied) hand decreased significantly. This means that the motor pathways to the real hand were affected by the illusion, which contributes to understanding the relationship between body-ownership and the motor system. The feeling of body ownership is a fundamental aspect of self-consciousness that arises from multisensory integration processes, where sensory inputs coming from different modalities are realigned in a unique reference frame. The ventral premotor cortex plays a crucial role in this network, establishing an anatomical link between the sense of body ownership and the motor system. The study also investigated the excitability modulation of motor circuits to the real (stimulated) hand during RHI and found a lower excitability of motor pathways to the real hand during the illusion. The inhibitory motor response also increased over time, with lower values measured at each time-point.
The article describes how macrophages destroy pathogens and diseased cells by engulfing them through Fcγ receptor (FcγR)-driven phagocytosis of antibody-opsonized targets. The mechanism controlling the threshold for the response is unclear, but the researchers developed a DNA origami-based engulfment system that allows precise nanoscale control of the number and spacing of ligands. They found that macrophages use information about local ligand densities to make critical engulfment decisions. The researchers also demonstrated that tightly spaced ligands strongly enhance phagocytosis compared to the same number of more dispersed ligands. The results have implications for the mechanism of antibody-mediated phagocytosis and the design of immunotherapies.
Kinesin-8 motor KIF19A accumulates at cilia tips and controls cilium length. Defective KIF19A has led to health issues such as hydrocephalus and female infertility due to abnormally elongated cilia. KIF19A possesses the dual functions of motility along ciliary microtubules and depolymerization of microtubules, with its features enabling these functions clustered on its microtubule-binding side. The basic clusters of L2 and L12 tether the microtubule. Kinesin superfamily proteins (KIFs) are microtubule-based molecular motors, with most KIFs actively moving along the MT toward either the plus or minus end to transport cellular cargoes, but KIF19A is unique in its KIF group in that it possesses both functions, MT-based active motility toward the plus-end and MT-depolymerizing activity. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of KIF19A could lead to treatments for health issues related to defective KIF19A.
This study identifies a specific transporter, called SpSlc4a10, which is critical for pH regulation and formation of the calcitic endoskeleton in sea urchin larvae. The transporter is specifically expressed by calcifying primary mesenchyme cells, which produce calcium carbonate crystals for the endoskeleton. Reductions in seawater pH, resembling future ocean acidification scenarios, led to an increase in SpSlc4a10 expression, suggesting a compensatory mechanism to maintain calcification rates. Knock-down of the transporter led to pH regulatory defects, decreased calcification rates, and skeleton deformations. The study suggests a new pH regulatory and bicarbonate-concentrating mechanism that is important for understanding biomineralization strategies in animals and their interaction with a changing environment.
During cytokinesis, the abscission checkpoint delays abscission to protect the cell from genomic instability caused by residual mitotic errors. The checkpoint is maintained by Aurora B kinase, which phosphorylates multiple targets including CHMP4C, a regulatory ESCRT-III subunit necessary for the checkpoint. The checkpoint creates cytoplasmic abscission checkpoint bodies (ACBs) that delay abscission by regulating the ESCRT membrane fission machinery. ACBs are derived from mitotic interchromatin granules and contain phospho-Aurora B and tri-phospho-CHMP4C. The formation of ACBs requires CHMP4C and the ESCRT factor ALIX. The presence of ACBs correlates with delayed abscission and delayed recruitment of ALIX to the midbody where it would normally promote abscission. The abscission checkpoint is normally active during cytokinesis, and its signaling ceases if no errors are detected, but if residual mitotic errors are detected, then checkpoint activation is sustained. Checkpoint-induced abscission delay appears to be a multistep process involving phosphoregulation of several ESCRT-III activities, actin patch formation to stabilize the intercellular bridge, and sequestration of VPS4. Besides, the checkpoint also delays recruitment of IST1 and ALIX to the midbodies required for cytokinesis. Sustained checkpoint activity results in the formation of ACBs that contain pppCHMP4C, and it correlates with delayed abscission and recruitment of ALIX. The study shows that ACBs are present in different cell types and under multiple circumstances that activate the checkpoint.
Neocortical basal radial glia (BRG) and cerebellar Bergmann glia (BG) are basal progenitors derived from ventricular apical radial glia (ARG) that selectively lose their apical processes. BRG and BG have been implicated in the expansion and folding of the cerebrum and cerebellum respectively. Through a transcriptomic comparison, researchers found that BRG and BG have striking similarities in their molecular features. The heightened ERK signaling activity in ARG is tightly linked to the temporal formation and relative abundance of BRG in human and mouse cortices. The researchers concluded that BRG and BG have similar molecular mechanisms in their generation, which have implications for the evolution of cortical folding in the cerebrum and cerebellum.
Researchers have discovered how salamanders are able to regenerate limbs without accumulating senescent cells, which can accumulate in other species and lead to a decline in regenerative ability in mammals. Senescent cells were found to be induced during salamander limb regeneration, but efficient mechanisms for clearance ensured no accumulation. The researchers suggest that this elimination mechanism is one reason why the salamander’s ability to regenerate remains intact throughout its life. Animals such as mice and humans accumulate senescent cells in tissues as they age, which can cause tissue damage and cancer.
The role of mitochondrial Ca2+ (mtCa2+) in tumorigenesis still needs to be further understood, especially in relation to the downregulated expression of mitochondrial Na+/Ca2+/Li+ exchanger NCLX (SLC8B1) in human colorectal tumors. Decreased expression of NCLX causes mtCa2+ overload, mitochondrial depolarization, reduced tumor size, and concomitantly, drives metastatic spread, chemoresistance, and expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal, hypoxia, and stem cell pathways. Mechanistically, mtCa2+ overload leads to increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, which activate HIF1α signaling, thereby supporting metastasis of NCLX-null tumor cells. Loss of NCLX is shown to be a novel driver of metastasis in colorectal cancer. The study demonstrates the importance of NCLX as the major extrusion mediator of mitochondrial matrix Ca2+ and highlights how the balance between Ca2+ uptake by MCU and Ca2+ extrusion by NCLX is critical for maintaining mtCa2+ homeostasis, which in turn regulates metabolism and cell fate. NCLX is found to be significantly downregulated in human colorectal adenocarcinomas and NCLX loss is associated with late-stage colorectal adenocarcinomas. The study also explores the functional link between loss of NCLX expression and the development of CRC in vivo. The study shows that a loss of NCLX decreases mtCa2+ extrusion in CRC cells, inhibits proliferation and primary tumor growth while enhancing metastasis and drug resistance, and results in transcriptional changes reminiscent of the highly metastatic mesenchymal CMS4 CRC subtype. The study concludes that NCLX is a novel driver of metastasis and indicates that regulation of mtCa2+ is a novel therapeutic approach in metastatic colorectal cancer.
The importance of the cardiac lymphatic vascular system in heart patients has not been fully appreciated due to a lack of accessible systems. However, the development and function of cardiac lymphatic vessels in young adult zebrafish has been demonstrated. These vessels expand onto the ventricle using the coronary arteries as a guide. In regenerating adult zebrafish hearts, the lymphatic vasculature undergoes extensive lymphangiogenesis in response to injury. This suggests that the cardiac lymphatic system can influence the regenerative potential of the heart. The development of the cardiac lymphatic vasculature in zebrafish occurs post-embryonically before the development of the coronary vasculature. Analysis of lymphatic markers in zebrafish with mutations in genes encoding the secreted VEGF-C or its receptor FLT4/VEGFR3 resulted in an observed failure of the cardiac lymphatic vessels to expand onto the ventricle. The results suggest that cardiac lymphatic vessels should be a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of heart disease and may help modulate a pro-regenerative immune response.
The mechanisms by which the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) represses macrophage-elicited inflammation are not well understood. However, a new study in mouse macrophages has uncovered that the GR does not display a preference for a specific pro-inflammatory gene class, but instead effects repression by targeting distinct temporal events and components of transcriptional machinery. Specifically, at non-paused genes, GR attenuates the recruitment of p300 and histone acetylation, leading to a failure to assemble BRD4 and Mediator at promoters and enhancers, ultimately blocking Pol2 initiation. Conversely, at paused genes, GR activation triggers widespread promoter accumulation of NELF, with myeloid cell-specific NELF deletion conferring glucocorticoid resistance. The findings suggest that GR-mediated repression of pro-inflammatory genes occurs via distinct mechanisms depending on the gene class.
Axonal arborizations are important for routing signals in the mammalian brain, but reconstruction of these arborizations has been limited due to the small size of the axons and their dispersion over large brain regions. However, a new platform for high-resolution, three-dimensional fluorescence imaging has been developed that can visualize and reconstruct long-range axonal arbors. This platform includes a high-speed two-photon microscope integrated with a tissue vibratome and computational tools. The researchers demonstrate the power of this approach by reconstructing the axonal arbors of multiple neurons in the motor cortex of a single mouse brain. This new platform can help map neural circuits across the entire brain and could be vital in defining fundamental cell types. The approach is compatible with long-term imaging and sectioning of samples and allows imaging of fine axons with high resolution. The computational pipeline for registering, visualizing, and storing large datasets was also developed.
The RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) is a ribonucleoprotein complex composed of AGO proteins and small RNAs (sRNAs) such as miRNAs, which are responsible for regulating gene expression. RISC cleaves its target mRNAs to produce truncated 5' and 3' RNA fragments. It has been previously observed that the 5' cleaved RNA fragments are marked with uridylation for degradation. The pathway for degradation of these fragments has remained unclear until this study, which identified RICE1 and RICE2 as novel cofactors of Arabidopsis AGOs. The study showed that RICE1 acts as a DnaQ-like exonuclease and specifically degrades single-strand RNAs in vitro, but does not degrade miRNAs or miRNA*s in vivo. RICEs act to degrade uridylated 5’ products of AGO cleavage to maintain functional RISC. The study also suggests a possible link between decay of cleaved target mRNAs and miRNA stability in RISC. Furthermore, the study also suggests that the turnover of miRNA targets and miRNA accumulation might be related in vivo.
Electron microscopy of biological specimens suffers from radiation damage, which limits the attainable resolution of images. To maximize signal-to-noise ratio, an optimal exposure can be defined for a given resolution. In this study, the optimal exposure for a rotavirus VP6 specimen was accurately measured by collecting a continuous exposure series using a K2 Summit direct detector and filtering movie frames for images with improved contrast for higher resolution reconstructions. The technique should benefit cryo-EM work on all types of samples.
Dendritic integration of synaptic inputs mediates rapid neural computation as well as longer-lasting plasticity. The roles of different channels in the rapid vs long-term effects of dendritically initiated spikes (dSpikes) are unknown, however, it is shown that Nav channels that mediate dSpikes are required for long-term potentiation (LTP) in the distal apical dendrites of hippocampal pyramidal neurons, contributing to memory formation through their role in long-lasting synaptic plasticity. The concerted action of multiple synapses is required for LTP, but the patterns of synaptic activation that result in LTP vary greatly. Three distinct ideas have been considered for the type of postsynaptic depolarization required to produce the calcium entry leading to Hebbian LTP: postsynaptic axo-somatic action potential firing, localized passive synaptic depolarization, or localized synaptic depolarization activating dendritic nonlinearities, such as locally initiated dSpikes. Na-dSpikes are necessary for the induction of LTP in response to theta-burst stimulation of synapses in the distal apical tuft dendrites, and it is explained why these spikes are an essential mechanism. The hypothesis that dSpikes are a causal step in the induction of LTP has not been directly tested before because dendritic Nav channels and Na-dSpikes are difficult to analyze without inhibiting synaptic transmission, however, by using a relatively low concentration of bath-applied tetrodotoxin (TTX; 20 nM), postsynaptic Na-dSpikes have been selectively suppressed without blocking presynaptic spikes or synaptic transmission.
Researchers have used electron cryo-tomography and electron crystallographic image processing to investigate the structure of bovine F1Fo ATP synthase, a member of the rotary ATPases which catalyse the conversion of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. The bovine heart enzyme is around 600 kDa and consists of 17 different subunits, and can be subdivided into four functional parts: the catalytic part, the membrane-embedded part, the central stalk, and the peripheral stalk. The structure of the matrix-exposed region was determined at 24 Å resolution by subtomogram averaging, revealing that monomeric bovine heart F1Fo ATP synthase is sufficient to deform lipid bilayers. The study has implications for the formation of ATP synthase dimers and dimer rows, and for the shaping of mitochondrial cristae.
The role of iron, heme, and HRI in regulating protein translation and red blood cell production in mice was investigated. It was found that HRI controls translation by phosphorylating eIF2α and plays a key role in the translation of mRNAs encoding cytosolic and mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. The absence of HRI during iron deficiency elicits a cytoplasmic unfolded protein response and impairs mitochondrial respiration. HRI-mediated translation is necessary for effective erythropoiesis during iron deficiency and it represses the mTORC1 signaling that is activated by elevated erythropoietin levels. HRI is the predominant eIF2α kinase in erythroid cells and is responsible for over 90% of eIF2α phosphorylation. HRI and mTORC1 signaling have roles in the global translation of ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins in developing erythroid cells during iron deficiency. HRI is necessary to inhibit both cytoplasmic and mitochondrial protein synthesis in iron-deficient erythroid cells. The HRI–eIF2αP pathway contributes directly to the regulation of mitochondrial protein synthesis during iron deficiency, in addition to repressing mTORC1 activity.
Researchers have created a detailed model of the human apoptosome, a structure that plays a vital role in programmed cell death and disease (apoptosis), that could help to understand how it functions. The cell death signal causes the assembly of an active apoptosome from Apaf-1 and procasmase-9 (pc-9). The resulting model gives insights into cytochrome c binding, nucleotide exchange and conformational changes that drive the assembly. During activation, an acentric disk is formed on the central hub of the apoptosome. This disk contains four Apaf-1/pc-9 CARD (caspase recruit domain) pairs arranged in a shallow spiral, with the fourth pc-9 CARD at lower occupancy. The study provides a molecular framework to understand the role of apoptosome in programmed cell death and disease.
The kinesin-14 family of motor proteins is typically non-processive, meaning multiple motors are needed to generate movement. However, a new study shows that the yeast kinesin-14 Kar3 can generate processive movement as a heterodimer with non-motor proteins Cik1 or Vik1. The non-catalytic domain of Kar3 plays a key role in this process by acting as a “foothold” that allows Kar3 to bias translocation towards the minus end. This process rivals the speed and run length of conventional motors and supports transport of the Ndc80 complex in vitro. The findings provide an example of a non-conventional translocation mechanism and explain how Kar3 substitutes for key functions of Dynein in the yeast nucleus.
Chromosomes normally attach to spindle microtubules at points called kinetochores, which help drive chromosome movement during cell division. However, research conducted on Caenorhabditis elegans oocytes has found that kinetochores are not required for chromosome segregation on acentrosomal spindles. In this study, scientists discovered that lateral microtubule–chromosome associations established during prometaphase remain intact during anaphase, leading to a new form of kinetochore-independent segregation. Chromosome dynamics during congression and segregation are controlled by opposing forces, with a balance of forces mediating chromosome movements during congression and segregation where plus-end directed forces originating in the rings are countered by progressive accumulation of minus-end forces on the chromosomes. Ring removal shifts the balance between these forces, triggering poleward movement along lateral microtubule bundles. As oocytes lack centrosomes, microtubules are not nucleated from predefined poles, leading to lateral contacts during prometaphase, facilitating segregation, resulting in each pair of separating chromosomes located within an open microtubule channel, with disassembling ring structures in between. Super-resolution imaging showed the chromosomes associated with lateral bundles of microtubules during anaphase, and revealed that spindle poles broaden but remain intact during anaphase leading to a new mechanism of chromosome segregation in oocyte meiosis.
Neuropathic pain is difficult to treat, as multiple molecular pathologies contribute to the hyperexcitability of primary afferents that underlie the pain. Researchers propose that this arises from a switch in spike initiation dynamics and that reaching a tipping point can occur via several different molecular pathologies. The basis for this is highly degenerate, meaning that single-target drugs are likely to fail due to maladaptive plasticity in any one of many ion channels. The researchers used computer simulations and experiments to confirm these predictions. They also suggest that a new paradigm is needed, as degeneracy in the pain system allows the pathogenic process to circumvent single-target drugs.
MicrobeFDT is a new resource that helps identify the metabolism of specific therapeutic drugs or compounds in the human microbiome. It clusters chemically similar drugs and food compounds, linking them to microbial enzymes and known toxicities. The tool allows users to interrogate microbial metabolism, compounds of interest, and toxicity profiles, generating novel hypotheses of microbe-diet-drug-phenotype interactions that influence patient outcomes. The resource is based on a chemical similarity network linking 10,822 food, drug, and endogenous compounds using the PubChem compound identifier. Substructure-based clustering is used to identify compounds that share metabolism, and MicrobeFDT is able to predict enzymatic reactions of drugs in the context of human enzyme catalyzed reactions. The tool provides insights into gut microbiota driven biotransformation of foods and drugs, characterizes the dynamics of the gut chemical space, and links gut chemistry to microbial ecology. MicrobeFDT can help researchers to modify a function in the microbiome and to predict how disruptive modifying a function might be.
The document discusses the impact of mitochondrial toxins on different types of cells and how they can cause adverse drug reactions. The study focuses on the drug mubritinib, which was reported to be a HER2 inhibitor, but was found to directly inhibit mitochondrial respiratory complex I, leading to a decrease in cardiac-cell beat rate and cell death. The study also identifies a toxicophore in the heterocyclic 1,3-nitrogen motif that is critical to complex I inhibition and anti-cancer cell activity. The study recommends caution in attributing a drug's mechanism of action without a detailed structure activity relationship analysis, as mitochondrial toxicity can affect many cell-wide processes.
CytoCensus is a machine learning-based image analysis tool for identifying and quantitating cells in complex 3D tissues. It allows biologists to efficiently analyze their image data and quantify parameters such as stem cell and progeny counts and cell division rates. CytoCensus is designed to be easily installed and work on multiple platforms, without the need for extensive manual annotation or advanced image processing skills. The tool has been tested on challenging datasets and outperformed other freely available image analysis software in accuracy and speed of cell detection. The technology was used to count stem cells and their progeny, and to quantify individual cell divisions from time-lapse movies of explanted Drosophila larval brains, comparing wild-type and mutant phenotypes. Additionally, the tool was used to analyze the 3D organization of multiple cell classes in zebrafish retinal organoids and cell distributions in mouse embryos. The tool is designed to be accessible and user-friendly, allowing biologists to analyze their data effectively, increase experimental throughput, and increase the statistical strength of their conclusions.
A study has revealed the unexpected role of SOX2 and parasympathetic nerves in the generation of the acinar lineage that is essential to the function of the exocrine organs, including the pancreas, tracheonasal glands, and salivary glands. The study used the acini-ductal network of the developing human and murine salivary gland to show that SOX2 is essential for the survival and establishment of acinar cells, rather than ductal cells, and targets acinar-specific genes. Furthermore, the study also identified that peripheral nerves regulate SOX2, creating acini via a conserved peripheral nerve-based mechanism during organogenesis. The findings have significant implications for epithelial morphogenesis.
Researchers have developed a new technique to measure the conductance across individual channels within the tight junction of the epithelial monolayer, known as trans-tight junction patch clamp technique. In both canine renal tubule and human intestinal epithelial monolayers, claudin-2 channels display conductances of around 90 pS, indicating that it forms gated paracellular channels. The opening probability (NPo) of claudin-2-dependent channels is similar at +100 or –100 mV in claudin-2 expressing monolayers but is reduced in the absence of claudin-2 induction. Claudin-2-dependent channels exist in stable (cstable) and transient (ctransient) closed states as well as in an opening state (o). The frequency of local tight junction channel openings is correlated with claudin-2 expression, and it is suggested that modulation of tight junction channel gating kinetics might be an unappreciated mechanism of barrier regulation.
Researchers have discovered a 13-gene signature that predicts sensitivity to p53-HDM2 inhibitors, such as NVP-CGM097, in both cell lines and patient-derived tumor xenograft models. The 13 genes are known p53 downstream target genes, suggesting that the gene signature reflects the presence of at least a partially activated p53 pathway in NVP-CGM097-sensitive tumors. The study used an unbiased discovery approach to identify molecular correlates of compound sensitivity to NVP-CFC218 and found a patient selection strategy based solely on the p53 status of the tumor would not be optimal. There is, therefore, a need for more sensitive and predictive biomarkers for p53-HDM2 inhibitors.
Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) is a lysosomal membrane protein that exports cholesterol and mediates Ebola virus entry. Nanomolar concentrations of U18666A, a cationic sterol, inhibit cholesterol export. U-X, a derivative of U18666A, was synthesized to identify the target of U18666A. U-X crosslinked to NPC1 when added to CHO cells, a crosslinking that was blocked by derivatives of U18666A that block cholesterol export. U18666A likely inhibits a protein required for lysosomal egress directly. NPC1 mediates egress of cholesterol that has entered lysosomes through receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDL. Mutations in NPC1 underlie Niemann-Pick C disease, a lysosomal storage disease. Some of the cholesterol reaches the endoplasmic reticulum where it has two actions. Firstly, it binds to Scap, a protein that regulates the cleavage and activation of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs). Secondly, excess cholesterol is esterified with a long chain fatty acid via acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase, which stores cholesterol in the form of cholesteryl esters. NPC1 is the passive attachment site for the Ebola glycoprotein, and its presumed cholesterol transport activity is not required.
This article discusses the role of DNA polymerase α (Pol α)/primase complex in initiating DNA synthesis in eukaryotes during replication. The complex is responsible for producing RNA-DNA oligonucleotides that prime synthesis of new DNA. The article reports the crystal structures of the catalytic core of yeast Pol α in unliganded form and in binary and ternary complexes with RNA and DNA. The study shows that Pol α recognizes the A-form RNA primer/DNA template helix and that the resulting synthesis of B-form DNA terminates primer synthesis. The completed RNA-DNA primer is spontaneously released by the Pol α/primase complex, which simplifies current models of primer transfer to leading- and lagging-strand polymerases. The proposed mechanism of nucleotide polymerization by Pol α may contribute to genomic stability by limiting the amount of inaccurate DNA at the start of each Okazaki fragment.
The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway controls animal development and tissue homeostasis via transcriptional switches, but its deregulation can lead to many different cancers, particularly colorectal cancer. The Wnt enhanceosome is a multiprotein complex that mediates Wnt/β-catenin signaling and controls context-dependent transcriptional switches via TCF/LEF-responsive enhancers. Pygo is a chromatin reader that captures β-catenin via Legless/BCL9 in the Wnt enhanceosome. Legless and BCL9 are also essential for Wnt signaling and development as they associate with the nuclear co-repressor, Groucho/TLE, and the Chip/LDB1-SSDP enhanceosome core complex. The C-terminus downstream of Legless/BCL9's adaptor elements is crucial for Wnt responses as it binds to Groucho/TLE and Chip/LDB1-SSDP via an evolutionary conserved element. Failure of Wnt-inducible enhancers to respond to negative feedback imposed by the BAF complex strongly predisposes to cancer.
Researchers have developed a new malaria vaccine that has shown promising results in mice and human liver cells. The vaccine is based on a genetically attenuated form of the malaria parasite that has two genes deleted, allowing it to infect but not reproduce in the liver. The researchers believe that the vaccine, which could provide high levels of protection
Researchers have discovered that certain leaf metabolites can provide accurate indicators of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) associations in plants, making it easier to screen for these associations. Blumenol-type metabolites, which are produced by the cleavage of carotenoids, were found to provide specific and reliable markers for AMF colonization. These markers accumulate in the leaves and are synthesized and transported from roots to shoots. The blumenols were found in many monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous crop and model plants, and were suitable for field-based mapping of AMF-related genes. The development of a reliable and accessible metabolite marker in aerial plant tissues will be useful for AMF research, as identifying these associations is usually laborious and time-consuming, requiring destructive root harvesting and microscopic examination or transcript analyses.
The study investigates whether inner speech, the silent production of words in one's mind, is associated with an efference copy, a duplicate neural signal that predicts and suppresses the sensory consequences of willed movements. The study uses a new experimental design to show that inner speech is associated with an efference copy, resulting in sensory suppression of external audible phonemes if the content of the inner phoneme matches the content of the audible phoneme. These findings suggest that inner speech may ultimately reflect a special type of overt speech. The study also explores the concept of sensory attenuation, where self-generated sensations feel less salient than externally-generated sensations. The results suggest that inner speech by itself can cause sensory attenuation, even in the absence of an overt motor action.
A team of researchers has studied whole-animal behavior in pupal fruit flies in order to identify the neural substrates of behavior that map onto brain activity. They mapped the musculature of the fruit fly and comprehensively imaged muscle activation at single-cell resolution. This allowed them to identify a previously undescribed behavioral phase and extract major movements using a convolutional neural network. They deconstructed movements into a syllabary of co-active muscles and identified specific syllables that are sensitive to neuromodulatory manipulations. Muscle activity showed considerable variability with sequential increases in stereotypy dependent upon neuromodulation. The researchers provided a platform for studying whole-animal behavior, quantifying its variability across multiple spatiotemporal scales, and analyzing its neuromodulatory regulation at cellular resolution. The study contributes to explaining how nervous systems generate and organize behavior in animals.
Researchers have shown that the DAF-16/FoxO gene is necessary for the survival of the Caenorhabditis elegans roundworm during periods of starvation, but how the gene promotes starvation resistance is unknown. Using genetic, pharmacological, and metabolomic analyses, the researchers discovered that DAF-16/FoxO promotes starvation resistance by promoting carbon flux through the glyoxylate shunt and gluconeogenesis, leading to the synthesis of trehalose, a disaccharide of glucose that is both a stress protectant and an energy source for glycolysis. The team also discovered that metabolic cycling between trehalose and glucose is necessary for trehalose's dual function. The work demonstrates the central role of trehalose metabolism in maintaining energy homeostasis and stress resistance during acute starvation.
This study investigates the mechanisms of adaptation to inactivation of essential genes by focusing on dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), an essential enzyme in E. coli. The researchers inactivate DHFR by introducing mutations in the folA locus, generating strains that express inactive DHFR, which are only viable with external metabolic compensation. They subsequently adapt to low concentrations of external metabolites through metabolic rewiring via loss-of-function mutations in two key loci, resulting in major global shifts in metabolome and proteome. The study shows that the prevalent evolutionary solution is metabolic rewiring due to the availability of a greater number of trajectories leading to consecutive gene inactivation events. The paper also demonstrates how adaptation to loss-of-function mutations in DHFR, the cellular target of the antibiotic trimethoprim, can lead to high levels of drug resistance.
Researchers have identified a protein family known as the 'Royal family' that can recognise the most abundant RNA modification in eukaryotic messenger RNAs (mRNAs). The N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification is recognised by a group of proteins known to deform RNA hairpins to allow recruitment of hnRNPs which can regulate the alternative splicing of mRNAs. The team demonstrated that m6A marks are critical for a protein known as SND1 to bind RNA decorated with the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF50 hairpin. The m6A modification increases SND1 protein stability in KSHV-infected cells, which in turn regulates KSHV early gene expression and is essential for KSHV lytic replication.

Researchers have identified the cellular and molecular changes that occur during dermal condensate (DC) morphogenesis, the precursor to the hair follicle dermal papilla, which regulates hair cycling and bears hair inductive potential. Using a mouse model and 3D and 4D microscopy, the researchers identified cell cycle exit and cell shape changes as early hallmarks of DC morphogenesis and that DCs form de novo and via directional migration. Fibroblast Growth Factor 20 (Fgf20) was found to enhance cell motility and condensation and to orchestrate early cellular and molecular events. The study sheds light on the molecular regulators of DC/DP morphogenesis, and the cellular mechanism of DC development.
The deletion of the MYBL2 gene, located in the common deleted region (CDR) on chromosome 20, is implicated in the development of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN). In a study using CD34+ cells from MDS patients, reduced expression of MYBL2 was observed in 65% of cases, whether they had a chromosome 20 deletion or not. Knockdown of MYBL2 in murine hematopoietic progenitors resulted in clonal dominance of these cells, leading to a clonal myeloproliferative/myelodysplastic disorder, reflecting what is observed in human myeloid malignancies. These findings indicate that downregulation of MYBL2 below levels predicted by classical haploinsufficiency underlies the clonal expansion of hematopoietic progenitors in a large fraction of human myeloid malignancies, and implicate aberrantly low levels of MYBL2 expression as a central mechanism in their development.
The document discusses the use of next-generation shRNA library to identify genes controlling the sensitivity and adaptation of multiple myeloma (MM) cells to the proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib. Knockdown of proteostasis factors result in resistance to carfilzomib, including knockdowns of chaperones, stress-response regulators and the 19S proteasome regulator. The protective effect of 19S knockdown is not simply mediated by slowing cell growth since knockdown of many other genes also have a similar or more dramatic impact on cell growth without increasing resistance to carfilzomib. Knockdown of 19S subunits and stress-response regulators conferred marked resistance to proteasome inhibition, while knockdown of 20S subunits sensitized to proteasome inhibitors. The opposing protective and sensitizing effects of 19S and 20S subunit knockdown were observed for the majority of shRNAs targeting these genes. The results suggest that understanding network rewiring can inform development of new combination therapies to overcome drug resistance.
Researchers have discovered that TAF7L is a critical component in the formation of fat cells in mice. Depletion of TAF7L resulted in impaired adipocyte differentiation and reduced white adipose tissue development. The study found that TAF7L plays an important role in adipocyte gene expression by targeting enhancers as a cofactor for PPARγ and promoters as a component of the core transcriptional machinery. Dissecting the molecular mechanisms regulating adipogenesis and adipose biology can potentially lead to therapeutic strategies for treating obesity and its associated diseases.
The HAT enzyme Mof is essential for the pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and early development. Mof is the enzymatic subunit of two different HAT complexes, MSL and NSL, but the individual contribution of each complex to transcription regulation in mESCs is not well understood. Genome-wide analysis has shown that MSL and NSL bind to specific and common sets of expressed genes, with NSL binding exclusively at promoters while MSL binds in gene bodies. Nsl1 regulates proliferation and cellular homeostasis of mESCs while MSL is the main HAT acetylating H4K16 in mESCs. MSL is important to keep a subset of bivalent genes silent in mESCs, while developmental genes require MSL for expression during differentiation. Thus, NSL and MSL HAT complexes differentially regulate specific sets of expressed genes in mESCs and during differentiation.
Researchers at Stanford University have identified the chemical mechanism that explains how identical cells organise within a population to become different "specialised states". Using yeast cells, which structure themselves to prioritise different metabolic activities depending on their position in a colony, the team discovered that there are simple physico-chemical principles that determine how isogenic (identical) cells spontaneously self-organise into coordinated shape, and advance a division of labour to suit the needs of their environment.

Researchers have developed a new method for studying lipid droplets, which are organelles that store neutral lipids and play a key role in cellular metabolism. The team created a transgenic reporter in zebrafish that fuses the tdTOMATO protein to Perilipin-2, a structural protein found on lipid droplets. This approach allows for in vivo imaging of lipid droplets in response to various perturbations. The team also conducted a chemical screen and identified several new regulators of lipolysis in adipocytes. Additionally, they found that the nitric oxide pathway plays a role in modulating lipid droplets in both adipocytes and cancer cells. The zebrafish model offers a tractable imaging platform to study lipid droplets across cell types and disease contexts.
The exosome complex, which mediates the degradation and processing of multiple classes of RNAs, controls diverse biological processes and is a vital determinant of a developmental signaling transition that dictates proliferation/amplification versus differentiation. Exosome complex integrity in erythroid precursor cells ensures Kit receptor tyrosine kinase expression and stem cell factor/Kit signaling, while preventing responsiveness to erythropoietin-instigated signals that promote differentiation, and functions as a gatekeeper of this developmental signaling transition. Downregulating exosome complex subunits can yield compelling phenotypes, and exosome complex subunit mutations yield pathologies. Exosc8 or Exosc9 downregulation disrupted protein/protein interactions within the complex and greatly decreased expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase Kit. Loss of Stem Cell Factor (SCF)-induced Kit signaling occurred concomitant with precocious acquisition of erythropoietin signaling.
PP2A subunits are altered in human cancers, and partial loss of PP2A function contributes to cell transformation. SV40 Small T antigen (ST) displaces regulatory B subunits of PP2A, which alters the abundance and types of PP2A complexes in cells, leading to cell transformation. ST also promotes A-C subunit interactions with alternative B subunits that are components of the Striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complex. The STRIPAK complex regulates PP2A specificity and activity, and its association with ST facilitates PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation of MAP4K4, leading to cell transformation through the activation of the Hippo pathway effector YAP1. MAP4K4 inactivation or partial suppression of MAP4K4 can replace the expression of ST in the transformation of human cells.
The article describes the importance of Thrombospondin 4b (Tsp4b) in the formation and maintenance of muscle attachments to the skeleton. Tsp4b is a component of the extracellular matrix (ECM) at myotendinous junctions (MTJs), where muscles attach to the ECM, and is required for proper assembly of the ECM fibrils. Zebrafish lacking Tsp4b experience muscle detachment due to defects in laminin localization and reduced integrin signaling at MTJs. The oligomerization of Tsp4b is required for ECM assembly, and recombinant human TSP4 functions similarly to zebrafish Tsp4b in rescuing muscle detachment and ECM assembly in Tsp4b-deficient embryos. The study suggests that Tsp4b has potential therapeutic uses in tendon strengthening and repair.
CpG islands are regions in the genome associated with most mammalian gene promoters, but their exact function remains unclear. Recent studies have shown that certain CpG islands act as nucleation sites for the polycomb repressive system, which regulates gene expression during early development. Research has discovered that KDM2B recognizes non-methylated DNA in CpG islands and recruits the polycomb system, contributing to gene repression. Additionally, KDM2B and KDM2A are bound to CpG islands genome-wide, revealing an unexpected and direct link between recognition of CpG islands and targeting of the polycomb system, which provides the basis for a new model describing the functionality of CpG islands as mammalian polycomb response elements.
Researchers from the University of Edinburgh have found that "moderate intrinsic noise massively increases the range of synaptic strengths supporting gamma oscillations and grid computation”. The finding sheds light on how the human brain tunes itself, which could lead to improved prosthetic devices or new drugs for neurological disorders. The study shows a critical interplay between noise and structure in neural circuits that support cognitive function. The human brain, they wrote, can have different frequencies of electrical activity that are associated with what we perceive and how we think.
A study has found a connection between self-produced actions and the perceived numerosity of subsequent visual stimuli. Tapping fingers rapidly caused subjects to underestimate the number of visual stimuli presented near the tapping region, while slow tapping caused overestimation. The distortions occurred for stimuli presented sequentially and simultaneously, for magnitude estimation and forced-choice comparison. The adaptation was spatially selective, primarily in external, real-world coordinates. The results suggest that vision and action share mechanisms that encode numbers, and that animals, including humans, estimate spontaneously and reasonably accurately the approximate quantity of arrays of objects. The study also suggests that the number sense is a highly generalised system that can combine numerical information from different senses and across different formats.
Researchers have discovered that the RhopH complex is essential for malaria parasites to enter and survive within erythrocytes, as well as channel-mediated nutrient uptake. The complex consists of three subunits: CLAG3, RhopH2, and RhopH3. The researchers found that RhopH is initially produced as a soluble complex that functions in erythrocyte invasion. This complex crosses the vacuolar membrane surrounding the intracellular parasite and becomes integral to the erythrocyte membrane through a PTEX translocon-dependent process. The researchers used mass spectrometry and single-particle cryo-electron microscopy to analyze the complex's structure and found that it is tightly assembled with extensive disulfide bonding and predicted transmembrane helices shielded, stabilizing it for trafficking but poised for host membrane insertion through large-scale rearrangements. The RhopH complex is thermostable and well-equipped for transit through diverse subcellular environments, which contributes to the malaria parasite's ability to evade host immunity. The researchers believe that the RhopH2 and RhopH3 subunits function to regulate the plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC), which selectively imports diverse nutrients into the parasite while maintaining low Na+ permeability to prevent host cell osmotic lysis.
A newly discovered fossilized beetle, Promyrmister kistneri, is believed to be an "imposter" of an ant colony that lived 99 million years ago. The beetle was part of the clown beetle family, which are specialized intruders of ant colonies with adaptations for infiltrating nests. The discovery suggests that obligate behavioral symbioses can evolve rapidly and last over significant periods of time. This beetle-ant interaction represents the most ancient behavioral symbiosis known in the Metazoa. The discovery implies that Haeteriinae, a family of beetles adapted for living in ant colonies, evolved close to the emergence of ant eusociality. The discovery also suggests that myrmecophiles, intruder arthropods that exploit the resources of colony-forming insect societies, have existed for a long time. The beetle's chemical adaptation was inferred based on its morphology, which implies a chemical strategy to become accepted or at least tolerated inside colonies. The study is based on a single specimen of Burmese amber collected from Myanmar.
The joint activity of large neural populations is both complex and high-dimensional. A strategy for understanding circuit function is identifying a low-dimensional dynamical system which accounts for the population activity. In order to identify the simplest dynamical system underlying population activity in movement control, the neural control of movement was examined. By imaging the pedal ganglion of Aplysia during fictive locomotion, it was discovered that the underlying dynamical system responsible for movement arose from a low-dimensional spiral attractor. Only the low-dimensional dynamics for movement control, not the heterogeneous high-dimensional population activity, were consistent within and between nervous systems. The findings provide experimental support for the idea that the neural population activity is a high-dimensional emergent property of a simpler, low-dimensional dynamical system.
Cells use regulated mechanisms to transport cholesterol to their plasma membranes (PMs) from low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) and through synthesis. However, the mechanisms of cholesterol transport are not fully understood, and all inhibitors of cholesterol transport so far have limited our understanding of post-lysosomal transport steps. A reversible inhibitor of cholesterol transport from PM to endoplasmic reticulum (ER), anthrolysin O (ALOD4), has been established to aid in this understanding. Using ALOD4, LDL-derived cholesterol has been found to travel directly from lysosomes to PM to meet cholesterol needs and subsequently from PM to regulatory domains of ER to halt cholesterol uptake and synthesis. It has also been determined that continuous PM-to-ER cholesterol transport allows the ER to constantly monitor PM cholesterol levels and respond rapidly to small declines in cellular cholesterol by activating SREBPs, which increase cholesterol uptake and synthesis. Animal cells carefully control both their overall amount of cholesterol and its distribution among organelles, particularly the PM. Recent studies have shown that one pool of PM cholesterol is sequestered by sphingomyelin, a second pool is sequestered by other membrane factors, and the excess cholesterol comprises a third pool that signals cholesterol excess to the regulatory machinery in the ER. ALOD4 does not form pores in cells at 37° C, making it ideal to study cells at a higher temperature. The binding of ALOD4 to cells triggers the activation of SREBPs without changing cellular cholesterol levels.
Researchers at Columbia University have used CRISPRi-mediated genome-wide screens in mammalian cells to identify the molecular target of nitrogen-containing-bisphosphonates (N-BPs), drugs commonly prescribed to treat osteoporosis and other bone-related conditions. In a study published in Nature Communications Biology, the team established that SLC37A3, a membrane protein with 12 transmembrane segments, forms a lysosomal complex with all-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation factor (ATRAID), a previously identified genetic target of N-BPs, and is required for releasing N-BP molecules from the lysosome to their molecular target, a previously unknown mechanism of action. The results of the study provide an improved understanding of N-BPs, the most commonly prescribed drugs used to treat osteoporosis, and may have significant clinical relevance.
Scientists have identified the timing and hierarchy of cardiac progenitor specification in the early mouse embryo. Using clonal genetic fate mapping, they found that Mesp1+ cells in gastrulating mesoderm are rapidly specified into committed cardiac precursors fated for distinct anatomic regions of the heart. Smarcd3 was identified as a marker of early specified cardiac precursors and a compartment boundary was found at the future junction of the left and right ventricles that arises prior to morphogenesis. These findings are important for understanding the basis of congenital heart defects and for deriving cardiac regeneration strategies.
A new methodology has been developed for rapidly imaging and classifying the structure of large populations of biopharmaceutical viruses with high resolution using Structured Illumination Microscopy (SIM) combined with machine learning algorithms. This approach allows for the rapid assessment of the quality of viral production with high throughput, obviating the need for traditional batch testing methods which are complex and time-consuming. The method has been demonstrated on viruses produced for oncolytic viriotherapy and vaccine development. The MiLeSIM (Machine Learning Structured Illumination Microscopy) approach is a powerful analysis tool for biotechnological processes involving virus production both in industry and in the research laboratory. The method has potential in many areas, including the investigation of the structural heterogeneity of oncolytic viruses, virus-based therapeutics, and vaccine development.
The RGD-binding integrin α8β1 is important for promoting nutrient absorption and regulating gastrointestinal motility, according to research in mice. Smooth muscle-specific deletion and antibody blockade of α8 in mice resulted in enhanced gastric antral smooth muscle contraction, more rapid gastric emptying, and more rapid transit of food through the small intestine leading to malabsorption of dietary fats and carbohydrates as well as protection from weight gain in a diet-induced model of obesity. Mechanistically, ligation of α8β1 by the milk protein Mfge8 reduces antral smooth muscle contractile force by preventing RhoA activation through a PTEN-dependent mechanism. Collectively, results identify a role for α8β1 in regulating gastrointestinal motility and identify α8 as a potential target for disorders characterized by hypo- or hyper-motility.
ARID1B is a gene that is implicated in several human disorders, including Coffin-Siris syndrome, growth retardation, corpus callosum agenesis, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This study created heterozygous Arid1b mice that exhibited similar physical and behavioral manifestations to human ARID1B mutations, including growth impairment, social behavior impairment, altered vocalization, anxiety-like behavior, and neuroanatomical abnormalities. The study found that the mice had deficiencies in the GHRH-GH-IGF1 axis, which were also found in human ARID1B patients. GH supplementation was able to correct growth retardation and muscle weakness but was not able to reverse neuropsychiatric defects associated with Arid1b. The study suggests underappreciated clinical manifestations of human ARID1B mutations that can be approached from a treatment perspective.
New research shows that glucagon, a hormone that regulates the levels of glucose in the blood, may be responsible for the features of diabetes. The study, published in eLife, conducted experiments to see if the absence of glucagon would prevent hyperglycemia and diabetes caused by the near-total loss of insulin-producing β-cells, one of the main causes of diabetes. The experiments showed that diabetes prevention in mice that don't have a glucagon receptor does require remnant insulin action from spared residual β-cells. Collectively, the study shows that glucagon antagonism could be a useful adjuvant therapy in diabetes only when residual insulin action persists, and could help future β-cell regeneration therapies depending on α-cell reprogramming.
The glucose-sensing Mondo pathway, which regulates metabolic genes in mammals, has been shown to play a role in vertebrate embryonic development. Knocking down mondoa impaired early embryonic development in zebrafish embryos and caused microtubule defects. The study showed that coordinated downregulation of genes in terpenoid and sterol biosynthesis pathways, upstream of pregnenolone synthesis, was responsible for the defects. Maternal-zygotic mutants of mondoa showed perturbed embryonic development with compensatory changes in the expression of metabolic genes. The study suggests a new role for MondoA in regulating early vertebrate development and glucose, cholesterol, and steroid hormone metabolism.
As people age, their skeletal muscle regenerative potential declines in part due to deficiencies in resident stem cells and derived myogenic progenitors, and the factors responsible for this decline remain unclear. The Transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) superfamily signalling pathway is widely believed to inhibit myogenic differentiation, but its elevated activity in aged skeletal muscle is surprising. Reduced expression of Smad4, the downstream cofactor for canonical TGFβ superfamily signalling, during regeneration was identified as a feature of aged satellite cells and myogenic progenitors. The dysfunction of Smad4 was caused by a reduction in SC (satellite cells)- and MP (myogenic progenitor)-amplification, leading to a severe deficiency in adult skeletal muscle regeneration. However, loss of Smad4 in aged satellite cells did not improve aged skeletal muscle regeneration.
Research has found that Ca2+-calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) contributes to synaptic transmission and is required for the maintenance of Long-term potentiation (LTP), which is considered the most compelling cellular model for learning and memory. Acute inhibition of CaMKII erases LTP and transient inhibition enhances subsequent LTP, strongly supporting the role of CaMKII as a molecular storage device. The mechanism by which the brain stores information has been a mystery, but CaMKII has emerged as a very attractive molecular candidate for information storage due to its activation by Ca2+/CaM resulting in autophosphorylation. Delivery of peptides into cells, such as with myr-CN27 or myr-AIP, has been shown to selectively and completely inhibit CaMKII, both in acute slices and in slice culture.
Researchers have used serial femtosecond X-ray crystallography to study the chromophore-binding domains of a bacterial phytochrome to determine the earliest steps of how plants, fungi, and bacteria sense red light. The study found that the protein senses light by detecting a bilin cofactor, which leads to partial detachment of the chromophore from the protein. The changes are wired together by ultrafast backbone and water movements around the chromophore, channeling them into signal transduction towards the output domains. The changes in the binding pocket manifest a liberation of the chromophore from the protein scaffold, which is necessary for the conformational rearrangements to occur in the downstream photoconversion to Pfr.
Mapping tensile stress patterns in tissues is challenging due to the invisibility of forces. Mechanical forces play an essential role in most cell functions; hence it has become increasingly important to analyze the tissues' stress patterns. The doc identifies three approaches to assess stress patterns in tissues: computational models, strain measurements following local cuts, and strain measurement of deformable objects. Using the Arabidopsis mutant, Quasimodo1, the doc demonstrates the relative contribution of shape- and growth-derived stress in prescribing maximal tension directions in aerial tissues. The study reveals that changes in water potential, and epidermal tension in plants can rescue the adhesion defects in the mutant. The results suggest that changes in the water potential primarily affect the internal tissues rather than the epidermis, and the epidermis efficiently osmoregulates under pressure. The study dissects the two contributions to the global tensile stress patterns in various plant tissues, shape-derived stress, and growth-derived stress.
Circadian clocks coordinate 24-hour rhythms of behavior and physiology in mammals. Alterations in food intake rhythms can disrupt peripheral clocks from the central clock, which promotes obesity and metabolic disorders. This study identifies a novel, more direct pathway of food-driven liver clock resetting involving oxyntomodulin (OXM). In mice, food intake stimulates OXM secretion from the gut, which resets liver transcription rhythms via induction of the core clock genes Per1 and 2. OXM directly links gastric filling with food and circadian rhythm phasing in metabolic tissues, revealing a direct link between meal timings and clock function. Shift work has also been found to impact the body’s internal clock which in turn can lead to life-threating health conditions.
The discovery of cytoplasm sharing without membrane breaches in the Drosophila rectal papillae reveals a new role for apical membrane remodeling in converting a multicellular epithelium into a giant multinucleate cytoplasm. The study identified that papillar cytoplasm sharing does not employ canonical mechanisms such as incomplete cytokinesis or muscle fusion pore regulators, but instead requires gap junction proteins, which are positioned by membrane remodeling GTPases. The research offers a new system to investigate the diversity of multicellular tissue organization and mechanisms and functions of cytoplasm sharing.
The brain assigns borders to foreground objects to segregate them from the background in order to understand a visual scene. Neurons in primate visual cortex encode which object owns a border (border ownership), but the underlying circuitry is not understood. The laminar organization and timing of border ownership selectivity in macaque visual area V4 was analyzed using multi-electrode probes. Border ownership selectivity occurs first in deep layer units and is not simply inherited from upstream areas. The preferred side of border ownership clusters in a systematic manner, possibly through corticocortical feedback and horizontal connections. Border ownership is a fundamental computation in visual perception that is thought to be critical to visual scene segmentation and object recognition.
There is a vast untapped reservoir of bacteria in soil and the environment that could produce natural products with biomedical applications. Researchers conducted global comparisons of biosynthetic diversity by comparing bacteria in soil microbiomes using pyro-sequencing, and discovered correlation between biosynthetic diversity, geographic distance, biome-type, and soil environments. The researchers found that the majority of bacteria that produce antibiotics or cytotoxic compounds are uncultured and can’t be reached through traditional methods of characterizing the biosynthetic potential of environmental bacteria. Despite millions of unique sequencing reads, rarefaction analysis indicated the researchers had not yet saturated the sequence space of either domain. By analyzing known gene clusters, researchers discovered two distinct types of biomedically relevant natural product gene cluster hot spots, "specific gene cluster hotspots" and "gene cluster family hotspots," which could be useful starting points for future natural product discovery efforts.
The DNA polymerase PolIIIα from Escherichia coli, which is important for DNA replication, has been difficult to characterize structurally due to the dynamic nature of the four-protein complex it forms with the DNA sliding clamp β, the proofreading exonuclease ε, and the C-terminal domain of the clamp loader subunit τ. However, by stabilizing the complex with mutated clamp binding motifs and using cryo-electron microscopy, the structure in both DNA-bound and DNA-free states has been determined to 8 Å resolution. The structures show how the polymerase is tethered to the DNA through multiple contacts with the clamp and exonuclease, and how the polymerase tail domain and τc move to make a novel contact between the polymerase and clamp in the DNA-bound state. These findings provide crucial insights for understanding the organization of the catalytic core of the replisome and an important step towards determining the structure of the complete holoenzyme.
Researchers conducted a study to identify neural representations of choice confidence during decision-making. They recorded simultaneous EEG-fMRI data while participants performed a direction discrimination task and rated their confidence on each trial. Using multivariate single-trial discriminant analysis of the EEG, the researchers identified a stimulus-independent component encoding confidence, which appeared prior to subjects' explicit choice and confidence report. Trial-to-trial variability in this signal was uniquely associated with fMRI responses in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), a region not typically associated with confidence for perceptual decisions. Activity in the VMPFC was functionally coupled with regions of the frontal cortex linked to perceptual decision-making and metacognition. The study aimed to derive a more faithful representation of these early confidence signals using EEG and exploit the trial-by-trial variability in these signals to build parametric EEG-informed fMRI predictors, thus providing a starting point to a more comprehensive spatiotemporal account of decision confidence.
Researchers have found that gut microbes play a key role in defending the brain against viral infection through enhancing microglia function. Germ-free mice without any gut bacteria or mice treated with antibiotics struggle to control viral replication in the brain, leading to increased paralysis. Additionally, microglia depletion leads to worsened demyelination. Oral administration of toll-like receptor ligands, which stimulate the immune system, to virally infected germ-free mice limits neurologic damage. The study suggests that gut immune-stimulatory products can influence microglia function to prevent CNS damage following viral infection.
The DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 is critical for immediate postnatal intestinal development, but not required for the survival of the adult intestinal epithelium. The recovery of DNA methylation state and intestinal health after acute Dnmt1 deletion is dependent on the de novo methyltransferase Dnmt3b. These enzymes cooperate to maintain DNA methylation and genomic integrity in the intestinal epithelium. Studies on mice have also shown that DNA methylation and Dnmts play a crucial role in embryonic development and cell differentiation processes. Loss of Dnmt1 causes global hypomethylation and increased mutation rates, leading to genomic instability and apoptosis. However, the Dnmt1-mutant adult intestinal epithelium survives without Dnmt1 due to the upregulation of Dnmt3b, which is essential for epithelial survival in the absence of Dnmt1. Overall, these results implicate a role for DNA methylation, maintained by both Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b, in protecting genomic stability in intestinal epithelial homeostasis.
The document describes a study that investigated the vascular-sensing mechanisms and disease consequences of acid-base conditions on artery tone and tissue perfusion. The study found that endothelial cells express a putative HCO3-sensor receptor, RPTPγ, which enhances endothelial intracellular Ca2+-responses in resistance arteries, facilitates endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation when CO2/HCO3- is present, and adjusts microvascular perfusion and blood pressure during acid-base disturbances and altered tissue metabolism. Loss-of-function variants in PTPRG, encoding RPTPγ, are associated with increased risk of cerebral infarction, heart attack, and reduced cardiac ejection fraction. The study also identified widespread endothelial Ptprg expression with prominent levels in the cerebral and coronary vasculature where metabolites, including acid-base equivalents, strongly influence arterial tone. The study suggests that therapy targeting HCO3–-related proteins may modify myocardial and cerebral perfusion preferentially in areas of unmet metabolic demand. The study concludes that RPTPγ exerts acute influences on endothelial signaling pathways regulating endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation in response to [HCO3-], and reduced endothelial intracellular Ca2+ responses in arteries from RPTPγ KO mice in presence of CO2/HCO3- likely explain the observed mixed attenuation of NO-mediated and EDH-type vasorelaxation. Lastly, the study observed no difference in resting blood
The density of vascular networks, which is responsible for distributing oxygen and nutrients to tissues, is determined by the temporal regulation of the VEGF/Notch feedback loop, according to a new study. The researchers found that networks were denser or less dense depending on the rate of endotheilial tip-cell selection. Tip and stalk cell identities are controlled via the Dll4-Notch lateral inhibition pathway, while reiterations of endothelial-tip-cell selection, sprout extension, and anastomosis are responsible for generating vascular networks. The team found that a host tissue-derived signal called Semaphorin3E-Plexin-D1 accelerated the tip-cell selection rate, leading to a dense network. Previous research indicated that different vascular network densities determine the specific amount of oxygen and nutrients to be delivered to each host tissue.
Familial Advanced Sleep Phase (FASP) is a heritable sleep phenotype characterized by early sleep and wake times. A mutation in the human Cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) gene co-segregates with FASP in one family. The mutation alters the conformation of CRY2, increasing its accessibility and affinity for FBXL3, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. This, in turn, promotes degradation of the protein, demonstrating that CRY2 stability controlled by FBXL3 plays a key role in the regulation of human sleep-wake behavior. Mouse models expressing mutant hCRY2 with the mutation found in the FASP family, exhibit an advanced sleep phase phenotype with altered circadian period and photic entrainment. The A260T mutation is located in the phosphate loop of the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) binding domain of CRY2. Human genetic studies provide valuable opportunities to elucidate novel molecular mechanisms of circadian/sleep regulation.
The amyloid β peptide (Aβ) is a key factor in Alzheimer's disease, and this study aims to investigate its molecular interactions. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, researchers identified proteins in the human brain extract that bind to oligomeric Aβ1-42 and monomeric Aβ1-42. They found that somatostatin-14 (SST14) was the most selectively enriched oAβ1-42 binder, and the binding interface consists of a central tryptophan within SST14 and the N-terminus of Aβ1-42. The presence of SST14 inhibited Aβ aggregation and may signify a role in the etiology of AD. The study provides an in-depth inventory of human brain proteins that oligomeric preparations of Aβ1-42 can bind to using an unbiased in vitro discovery approach.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, resulting in impaired movement of salts across cell surfaces, which leads to organ pathology and chronic bacterial infections. The most common mutation, F508del-CFTR, results in a misfolded protein that is recognized as defective by the endoplasmic reticulum quality control (ERQC) system and targeted for degradation. Several drugs have been found to enhance the F508del-CFTR protein's ability to reach the plasma membrane (PM), but have principal pharmacological effects not related to CFTR correction. This study aims to identify the molecular networks that control F508del-CFTR proteostasis by analyzing the mechanisms of action (MOAs) of these drugs. By deconvolving the gene signatures of these drugs through an approach based on transcriptional profiling, the researchers identified a group of genes that were commonly modified by most of the correctors. The method thus captures common MOAs but not MOAs specific for individual drugs or small groups of drugs. The researchers found several networks of signaling pathways made up of druggable receptors and kinases that inhibit ER degradation and enhance the transport of F508del-CFTR to the PM. These findings provide new insights into the physiology of cellular proteostasis and a rational basis for developing effective pharmacological correctors of the F508del-CFTR defect.
Long-range protein-protein interactions between separate mRNAs are possible and are facilitated when mRNAs are in close proximity. Previously, it was discovered that translational regulatory defects associated with mutations of control elements on one oskar (osk) mRNA were rescued in trans, demonstrating that inter-transcript interactions can occur. Here, the authors show that disruption of Polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB)-dependent particle assembly inhibits rescue in trans of defects associated with osk mRNA mutations and that regulation imposed by cis-acting elements in osk mRNA spreads to other mRNAs. The authors demonstrate that PTB has a critical role in rescue in trans, with direct RNA dimerization being much less important.
Scientists have demonstrated that complex protein topologies with six and seven-stranded beta sheets can be designed by combining smaller beta sheet domains, potentially explaining how complex beta sheet proteins evolved in nature. The researchers combined smaller independently folded beta sheet proteins to create large and complex beta sheet structures with significant accuracy using a novel approach. The new mechanism could provide a way to design beta sheet structures that could scaffold the pockets and cavities required for future protein function design.
The study investigated cytoplasmic microtubules (cMT) in the yeast species Ogataea polymorpha and found that unlike other yeast species, the pre-anaphase nucleus is not biased towards the bud neck. The regulation of spindle positioning only becomes active shortly before anaphase due to the unstable nature of cMTs in this species. The study also found that the bottleneck of cMT nucleation/anchoring is restricted at the level of recruitment of the γ-tubulin complex receptor, Spc72, to the spindle pole body, which is regulated by the polo-like kinase Cdc5. The study sheds light on the divergent nature of the temporal control of cMT formation in yeast species and highlights the importance of understanding the molecular physiology of yeast species for various industrial applications.
Researchers have identified a new step in centriole assembly that is regulated by polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4) activity. They found that PLK4 phosphorylates a conserved site, S428, on the centriole substrate STIL, promoting STIL binding to CPAP, which links the cartwheel to the outer microtubule wall of the centriole. This finding sheds light on how specific steps in centriole formation are regulated by PLK4 activity. Centrioles play important roles in organizing the assembly of the mitotic spindle and templating the formation of primary cilia. Defects in centriole biogenesis can lead to mitotic errors that contribute to tumorigenesis or growth retardation syndromes.
This study identified and characterized a homologue to eukaryotic TFIIEβ in archaea, which is likely to be the ancestor of TFIIE-like factors in eukaryotes. The archaeal TFEα/β complex is necessary for transcription initiation and contains a cubane 4Fe-4S cluster that is crucial for its function. The study also found that TFEβ is essential for cell viability in Sulfolobus acidocaldarius. Additionally, the study examined the steady-state levels of TFEα/β during the growth cycle and found that the complex varies in abundance. The authors used various methods to investigate these findings, including Western blotting and electron paramagnetic resonance.
The article describes the development of a workflow for targeted mass spectrometry using selected reaction monitoring to detect and quantify receptor protein isoforms. The lack of tools to specifically detect and quantify receptor protein isoforms is a major impediment to functional studies. The workflow was applied to the molecular diversity of neuronal neurexin receptors and uncovered an alternative splicing-dependent recognition code for synaptic ligands. The study provides a detailed protein expression map of neurexin alternative splice insertions, absolute quantification, and uncover novel alternative splicing-dependent regulation of neurexin-ligand interactions. The workflow can be highly multiplexed and applied to virtually any protein family and tissue.
The document discusses the process of amphibian gastrulation, specifically the internalization of presumptive endoderm through vegetal rotation. The authors show that at the cellular level, endoderm internalization exhibits characteristics of bottle cell formation and ingression. The process of vegetal rotation is based on active, region-specific tissue deformations within the vegetal cell mass, and cells move by amoeboid migration without involving lamellipodial, filopodial, or bleb-like protrusions. The authors suggest that vegetal rotation is a modification of invagination or ingression adapted to the multilayered structure of the vegetal mass and is based on ingression-type cell migration. The cellular mechanisms that drive vegetal rotation are not fully understood, and the authors aim to uncover this mechanism. They show that cell elongation and region-specific re-orientation at the onset of gastrulation, along with spatially graded differences in movement velocity, lead to orderly cell rearrangements, and in-plane cell rearrangement constitutes the major morphogenetic process to narrow the lower part of the explant. Cell migration depends on C-cadherin and the matrix protein fibronectin, and trailing edge retraction involves ephrinB1-dependent macropinocytosis and trans-endocytosis. Overall, the authors conclude that vegetal rotation is a unique process that has not been studied extensively in lower vertebrates and requires further research.
The study examines how small variations in the size, shape, and physiological features of animals affect their behavioral performance. The researchers used the example of the knifefish and measured the system dynamics of individual fish in a refuge tracking task. They found that although there was substantial variability between fish’s locomotor plant and controller, simulated closed-loop performance was robust to mismatch between the plant and controller, suggesting that animals rely on feedback rather than precisely tuned neural controllers to compensate for morphophysiological variability. The study also found that feedback via sensory systems attenuates behavioral variability in the biologically relevant range of tracking frequencies.
The study investigated the structural development of the superficial-layers of the medial entorhinal cortex and parasubiculum in rats. The grid-layout and cholinergic-innervation of calbindin-positive pyramidal-cells in layer-2 emerged around birth while reelin-positive stellate-cells were scattered throughout development. Early postnatally, layer-2 pyramidal but not stellate-cells co-localized with doublecortin - a marker of immature neurons - suggesting delayed functional-maturation of pyramidal-cells. The study found a dorsal-to-ventral maturation of entorhinal cortex and parasubiculum. The early appearance of calbindin-pyramidal-grid-organization in layer-2 suggests that this pattern is instructed by genetic information rather than experience. Superficial-layer-microcircuits mature earlier in dorsal entorhinal cortex, where small spatial-scales are represented. Maturation of ventral-entorhinal-microcircuits - representing larger spatial-scales - follows later around the onset of exploratory behavior.
This document examines how phosphorylation of eIF2α affects translation initiation by controlling the levels of active eIF2-GTP/Met-tRNAi ternary complexes. The study found that eIF2B competes with Met-tRNAi for eIF2-GTP and can destabilize TC, but eIF5 is able to out-compete eIF2B and stabilize TC. Phosphorylated eIF2-GTP translation initiation intermediate complexes can be inhibited by eIF2B. Additionally, the study found that eIF2B binding affinity for eIF2 at steady state is not influenced by guanine nucleotides, and that eIF2B can inhibit TC formation. The study proposes that these new interactions of eIF2B with TC reveal a second step of translation initiation regulated by eIF2α and suggest that these events ensure tight control of translation initiation.
The cerebellum plays an important role in motor learning, but its exact function is not well understood. Researchers used a new sensory-driven adaptation protocol to study the cerebellum's role in reflexive whisker protraction in mice. They found that potentiation at parallel fiber to Purkinje cell synapses contributes to reflex adaptation and enables expression of cerebellar learning through increases in simple spike activity. Additionally, the researchers studied the dynamics of touch-induced whisker movements in awake mice and found that the movements are a reflexive response rather than a stereotypical startle response or conscious exploratory movement. They also mapped the complex spike and simple spike firing of Purkinje cells and found heterogeneity in their responses, with strong complex spike responses in parts of crus 1 overlapping with large areas of the C2, D1, and D2 zones, and predominantly facilitating simple spike responses in adjacent areas in the medial and lateral parts of crus 1 and crus 2.
A study has found that there are two different subpopulations of insulin granules in pancreatic beta cells that are linked to the types of diabetes, type-1 and type-2. The research revealed that the two subpopulations of granules have different release characteristics, and package different secretory contents alongside insulin in response to diabetic model treatments. The study suggests that understanding the different granule subpopulations could provide new insights into the pathology of diabetes.
Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are a family of secreted signalling proteins that regulate diverse processes during development and homeostasis. The mechanism of BMP gradient formation has been extensively studied in the early Drosophila embryo. Enzymes within the Tolloid (Tld) family have a well-characterised domain structure in which the N-terminal protease domain is followed by a series of non-catalytic CUB and EGF domains. Here, researchers combine biophysical, biochemical and genetic approaches to determine how the domain structure of Tld acts to regulate its enzymatic activity. The researchers propose that the role of Drosophila Tld CUB domains can be segregated; the most C-terminal domains are necessary for Sog interaction, whilst the N-terminal domains manage a novel interaction with Collagen IV that acts to enhance Tld activity. In addition, the Tld-Collagen IV interaction is important for the Tsg enhancement of Sog processing by Tld.
Macrophage activation plays a prominent role in cardiovascular disease (CVD), but characterizing the mechanisms underlying macrophage activation is difficult given the functional heterogeneity of macrophages and the complex interplay between pro- and anti-inflammatory phenotypes. The interactome, which is a collection of physical protein-protein interactions (PPIs) with experimental evidence from high-throughput experiments and small-scale studies, is limited in its utility as it is not specific to any cell type, experimental condition or disease state, and is incomplete and biased towards highly studied proteins such as disease-related proteins or targets of pre-existing drugs. Researchers introduced context-specificity to the interactome by combining it with co-abundance networks, derived from unbiased proteomics measurements from activated macrophage-like cells. Each macrophage phenotype contributed to certain regions of the interactome. Using a network proximity-based prioritization method on the combined network, researchers predicted potential regulators of macrophage activation that capture inflammation, immunity and CVD signatures. The hunt for hitherto undiscovered mechanistic connections in macrophage activation, and therapeutic targets aimed at resultant CVD, has much to benefit from complex systems approaches emerging in medicine.
Natural killer (NK) cells are part of the innate immune system and are able to fight viral infections and tumours by producing inflammatory cytokines and targeting infected or abnormal cells. Studies have mainly focused on conventional NK (cNK) cells in the spleen, but recent research has identified two populations of liver NK cells - tissue-resident NK (trNK) cells and those similar to splenic cNK. The lineage of these liver NK cells was previously unclear but research has now shown that trNK cells form a distinct lineage from cNK and thymic NK cells. There appear to be at least four distinct lineages of NK cells: cNK, thymic, liver (and skin) trNK, and uterine trNK. Tissue-resident immune cells live in selected organs and deliver immune responses without the need for migration to the location of a pathogen or tumour. NK cells require specific transcription factors for development and development largely occurs in the bone marrow. Different subsets of NK cells can be identified in different tissues that appear to be distinguishable from cNK cells. In the liver, CD49a+ DX5- trNK cells have been identified as distinct either from cNK cells or as an intermediate stage in the development of mature splenic cNK cells, although this has not been definitively established. These findings could have implications for future research on issues including cancer, autoimmune disorders, and transplantation.
Autocatalytic activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) can lead to spontaneous activation and spurious signaling. Ligand-binding suppresses spontaneous activation by routing the EGFR to vesicular membranes that have high protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP) activity. This process enables EGFR to effectively transduce extracellular signals while ensuring robust yet diverse response to extracellular stimuli. Single-cell analyses revealed that the phosphorylation of the autophosphorylation site, signaling site, and trafficking site of EGFR varies with EGFR expression levels. High PTP activity suppresses autocatalysis, while low PTP activity potentiates it. Vesicular trafficking of activated EGFR is important in suppressing spontaneous activation and regulating its signaling response.
The document studies massive endocytosis (MEND) in BHK fibroblasts caused by large calcium transients through the involvement of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) openings. The study shows that MEND is initiated through the release of coenzyme A (CoA) and subsequent acyl CoA synthesis, which leads to membrane protein palmitoylation. This pathway requires the activity of palmitoyl acyltransferase DHHC5. MEND is also found to be initiated by lipid metabolites that promptly promote the PTP openings, while also being prevented by prior exposure to H2O2. It was also discovered that constitutive surface membrane turnover in BHK cells is contributed significantly by the MEND pathway.

The AXL receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is essential for controlling levels of type I interferons (IFNs), which have contrasting immunosuppressive and antiviral functions. While genetic ablation of AXL RTK resulted in enhanced production and signalling of type I IFN in vitro, resulting in speculated benefits of disabling AXL RTK function in vivo, including increased resistance to viral infection, a recent study has shown that AXL is actually essential for enabling the induction of protective antiviral adaptive immunity. Ablation of AXL was demonstrated to enhance susceptibility to infection by influenza A virus and West Nile virus. The immunosuppressive effects of type I IFNs may underlie their pharmacological efficacy in the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
Two neighboring polymorphisms in the Complement Receptor One (CR1) gene, named Sl2 and McCb, occur at high frequencies in sub-Saharan African populations, suggesting a possible survival advantage against malaria. The CR1 gene is involved in the control of complement activation and plays a key role in the pathogenesis of multiple diseases, including malaria. A large case-control study of severe malaria in Kenyan children found that the Sl2 polymorphism is associated with markedly reduced odds of cerebral malaria and death, while the McCb polymorphism is associated with increased odds of cerebral malaria. The protective association of Sl2 was greatest in children with normal α-globin, and CR1 genotypes had opposing associations on the risk of cerebral malaria. In addition, the Sl2 allele was associated with significant protection against uncomplicated malaria, whereas the McCb allele was associated with borderline protection against several common infections in Kenyan children. These findings highlight the importance of considering genetic interactions in disease-association studies.
Cdk5 is a kinase that has complex roles in maintaining neuronal health, including promoting and inhibiting neurodegeneration. In Drosophila melanogaster, Cdk5 has been shown to regulate basal autophagy, a mechanism that suppresses neurodegeneration. Cdk5 genetically interacts with Acinus (Acn), a nuclear protein that promotes starvation-independent basal autophagy. Loss of Cdk5 or its required cofactor p35 reduces S437-Acn phosphorylation, whereas Cdk5 gain-of-function increases pS437-Acn levels. The phospho-mimetic S437D mutation stabilizes Acn and promotes basal autophagy. In p35 mutants, basal autophagy and lifespan are reduced, but restored to near wild-type levels in the presence of stabilized AcnS437D. Expression of aggregation-prone polyQ-containing proteins or the Amyloid-β42 peptide enhances Cdk5-dependent phosphorylation of S437-Acn. These findings offer new insights into the complex mechanisms balancing the effects of loss and gain-of-function of Cdk5 on neurodegenerative diseases.
In polyploid crops, assigning functions to paralogs is challenging. A study was done on Brassica rapa, a polyploid crop, and found that almost three-quarters of the expressed genes showed circadian rhythmicity. The genome-wide expansion of the circadian expression phase among retained paralogous pairs was also observed. Studies have also shown the importance of circadian rhythms to plant biology and the implications of polyploidy for current models of genetic processes developed in Arabidopsis. To assess the functional significance of retained circadian clock genes in B. rapa, the circadian transcriptome was characterized, and circadian gene regulatory networks were compared between B. rapa and Arabidopsis. The study also developed a novel method for identifying changes in expression patterns, called DiPALM (Differential Pattern Analysis via Linear Models), to classify patterns of gene expression.
Researchers have identified a tin-based metal cluster, which can bind to an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) within the TFIID transcription complex, and shown that the binding can arrest the transcription process. The compound serves as a useful tool for studying the role of TFIID in both transcription initiation and reinitiation, and as a potential target for novel pharmaceutical interventions. Intrinsically disordered proteins/regions constitute a significant fraction of the metazoan proteome and are associated with many human diseases, but their biological functions are difficult to study. The specificity of the tin-based metal cluster offers hope for studying the role of IDRs, and developing novel therapeutics.
The Zinc finger binding protein 36 (ZFP36) family of RNA-binding proteins are important regulators of immune response, but their roles in adaptive immunity are not fully understood. Researchers used high-throughput sequencing of UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) to identify ZFP36 targets in mouse T-cells and found that ZFP36 regulates T-cell activation, proliferation, and effector functions by limiting activation marker expression, T-cell expansion, and promoting apoptosis. ZFP36 has also been found to repress mRNA target abundance and translation, notably through novel AU-rich sites in coding sequence. These findings suggest that inhibition of ZFP36 may enhance immune-based therapies.
Researchers have used small angle X-ray scattering to determine the structure of the immunoreactive region of a major antigen, LigB, from Leptospira interrogans. They then used this structure and a monoclonal antibody library to guide the design of a chimeric vaccine that improved protection over single-parent domain vaccines. This kind of structure-based antigen design strategy can be particularly fruitful when classical vaccines provide weak protection, such as the inactivated vaccines currently available against leptospirosis. Leptospira immunoglobulin-like (Lig) protein family is the most promising candidate for using in vaccines against leptospirosis. The LigB protein is attached to the leptospiral outer surface and is found in all pathogenic Leptospira genomes, while its expression during host invasion suggests an important role in virulence.
RNA granules are cellular compartments that contain RNA and RNA binding proteins. The spatial distribution of RNA granules in cells and the mechanisms that regulate it are not well understood. During polarization of the C. elegans zygote, germline RNA granules, called P granules, assemble preferentially in the posterior cytoplasm. MEX-5, an RNA-binding protein, is necessary and sufficient to suppress the granule formation of MEG-3, a scaffold protein, thus driving P granule asymmetry. Regulating access to RNA, combined with RNA-induced phase separation of key scaffolding proteins, may be a general mechanism for controlling the formation of RNA granules in space and time.
The proper development of the placenta is essential for a healthy pregnancy, including the proliferation, differentiation, and invasion of trophoblast cells. The impairment of these processes can lead to placental ischemia, resulting in intrauterine growth restriction and preeclampsia. The mechanisms regulating trophoblast invasion are unclear, but the reduction of Inverted formin 2 (INF2) has been found to impede invasion in human extravillous trophoblasts. In mice, the loss of Inf2 results in maternal and fetal placental insufficiency, with reduced spiral artery numbers and late gestational hypertension in dams, and growth restriction in fetuses. These findings suggest that INF2 plays a critical regulatory role in trophoblast invasion and could be a target for improving fetal outcomes.
The yeast Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 (TORC1) controls cell growth by integrating signals from growth factors and nutrients. The exact mechanism by which amino acids stimulate TORC1 activity is not fully understood, but this study shows that when amino acids are transported into cells, they trigger the influx of H+ ions, and that the Pma1 H+-ATPase enzyme is essential in this process. The researchers also found that the amino acid β-alanine, which cannot be used as an N source, activates TORC1 via the same mechanism. The study suggests that Gap1, a transporter protein, may act as a transceptor to promote TORC1 activation, or that β-alanine may be detected by a cytosolic amino acid sensor.
Researchers developed a visual task to study the sources of variability in decision-making behavior. The task involved rats accumulating discrete numbers of flashes presented to the left and right visual hemifields and indicating the side with the greater number of flashes, while being restrained voluntarily. Based on their findings, the researchers suggest that noise in the decision-making process does not necessarily follow the widely used drift-diffusion modeling approach, but instead is closely related to proposed models of numerical cognition and counting. The study also demonstrates that rats can perform complex cognitive behaviors during voluntary head restraint, providing a platform for characterizing noise during decision-making across multiple brain regions.
The article discusses the role of proteins in the export of bulky collagen proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Specifically, the study looks at the connection between TANGO1, which binds and exports Procollagen VII from the ER, and SLY1, a protein required for membrane fusion. Knockdown of SLY1 using siRNA resulted in the arrest of Procollagen VII in the ER without affecting other proteins. The study found that SLY1 and the ER-specific SNARE Syntaxin 18 were required for the export of Procollagen VII, but not Procollagen I, suggesting that there are different pathways for the export of secretory cargoes. Further experiments revealed that SLY1 interacts with TANGO1, and immunoprecipitation and cross-linking experiments implicated SLY1 in ER exit sites. Knockdown of SLY1 and TANGO1 resulted in the accumulation of Procollagen VII in the ER, indicating their involvement in its export. The findings suggest the existence of different mechanisms for the export of bulky collagen proteins, and highlight the role of specific proteins in these processes.
Researchers have developed an organic electrochemical transistor array (OECT-array) technique for monitoring catecholamine neurotransmitters (CA-NTs) in rat brains. The technology can provide real-time and direct readout of the release of CA-NTs with a sensitivity of nanomolar range and a temporal resolution of several milliseconds, allowing for simultaneous mapping of evoked dopamine release at multiple striatal brain regions in different physiological scenarios. The study reveals a complex cross-talk between the mesolimbic and the nigrostriatal pathways that are heterogeneously affected by the reciprocal innervation between ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra pars compacta. OECT has emerged as a promising transducer for detecting chemical, electrical and molecular signals in vivo, representing a promising tool for monitoring neurotransmitter release in living animals.
A new method of reprogramming cells has been developed using RNA devices called "signal-connectors" which can connect one signal to another at the translational level, allowing for the repression or enhancement of target genes in response to signals. These signal-connectors have been used to construct various logic gates and feedback loops, and have been successful in the identification and redirection of cancer cell states. The technology is RNA-based and acts at the translational level without the need for an exogenous protein, allowing for both negative and positive connections between different biomolecules. The signal-connectors were tested on various genes and were successful in repressing the expression of target genes and in enhancing the translation of others. The technology is modular and can be used with different aptamer domains to regulate different genes. The signal-connectors can also be used to construct various types of logic gates and circuits. This new technology represents a novel platform for redirecting cellular information.
The study looked at the connections between social reward and social selectivity, aggression, and oxytocin receptor signaling pathways in monogamous prairie voles and group-living meadow voles. The results showed that female prairie and meadow voles worked harder to access familiar individuals and huddled more with familiar subjects, while male prairie voles displayed strongly selective huddling preferences for familiar animals but only worked harder to repeatedly access females versus males. Meadow voles exhibited social preferences but low social motivation, consistent with tolerance rather than reward supporting social groups in this species. Oxytocin receptor binding predicted individual variation in prosocial and aggressive behaviors. The study provides a basis for understanding species, sex, and individual differences in the mechanisms underlying the role of social reward in social preference.
A study has found that individuals with Down syndrome have an excessive activity of inhibitory circuits in the brain, resulting in various cognitive deficits. The study used a mouse model of Down syndrome to examine specific GABAergic circuits in the prefrontal cortex. The authors found that the dendritic synaptic inhibitory loop formed by somatostatin-positive Martinotti cells and pyramidal neurons was strongly enhanced, while perisomatic inhibition from parvalbumin-positive interneurons was unaltered, but these interneurons exhibited increased excitability. These microcircuit alterations resulted in reduced pyramidal-neuron firing and increased phase locking to cognitive-relevant network oscillations in vivo. The study suggests that interventions to ameliorate cognitive dysfunctions in individuals with Down syndrome can be achieved through a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying a core feature of the condition, such as intellectual disability.
The document describes a series of compounds that can act as positive or negative allosteric modulators of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in the brain. These modulators can enhance or inhibit the response of NMDA receptors, depending on their chemical structure and the concentration of agonists. The compounds bind to the same site on the receptor and share mechanistic features, but some are more selective for certain receptor subtypes than others. These modulators could be useful tools for probing the role of NMDA receptors in both healthy brain and neurological diseases.
The protein Lamin B receptor (LBR) is present in the inner nuclear membrane and plays a key role in the synthesis of cholesterol. Mutations in LBR that cause Greenberg skeletal dysplasia or Pelger-Huët anomaly prevent the rescue of a cell line that is deficient in LBR, revealing that these disorders result from the loss of LBR functionality. Defective LBR variants have either disturbed enzymatic activity, reducing the hormone required for cholesterol production, or are metabolically unstable, leading to their rapid degradation. LBR mutants may provide a useful model to explore the mechanisms behind protein turnover in mammalian cells at the nuclear envelope site.
Acidosis, a common feature in neurological disorders such as stroke, is a major contributor to neural injury. It was initially thought that Ca2+ influx via homomeric acid-sensing ion channel 1a (ASIC1a) was the leading cause of ischemic acidotoxicity, however, a new study has found that extracellular protons activate neuronal death independent of ASIC1a's ion-conducting functions. Instead, it activates the protective death pathways otherwise known as necroptosis via the phosphorylation of serine/threonine kinase receptor interaction protein 1 (RIP1). Moreover, the pH 6.0 solution results in typical necrotic morphology via the stimulation of acidic neuronal death, and not apoptotic changes. The study found it implausible that the small increase in intracellular Ca2+ level following ASIC1a channels' Ca2+ influx fully accounted for the significant neuronal damage under pathological conditions. The study strongly suggests that ASIC1a can potentially be a broad-spectrum therapeutic target in neurological disorders. 
The document discusses a new method for visualizing the synthesis of macromolecules (DNA, RNA, protein, and glycosylation) in living organisms using fluorescent staining and light sheet fluorescent microscopy. The method involves injecting modified analogs of the precursor molecules into animals and detecting them using copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition chemistry. The method can be used to study cell behavior during tissue remodeling, proliferation, stress, or disease. The paper presents a pipeline for segmentation and classification of morphological regions of interest and individual cells to enable multiscale, quantitative analysis of macromolecule synthesis in heterogenous tissues at the organ, cellular, and molecular levels. Examples include visualizing macromolecule synthesis in the regenerating axolotl salamander limb and the quantification of changes in DNA synthesis rates after limb denervation. The method provides a means to obtain high-quality 3D images from tissues 1 mm in depth in less than 10 min per sample and simultaneously capture information from both the cellular and molecular levels of organization.
A study by researchers from the University of California Berkeley, published in eLife, challenges the notion that the vast majority of transcription factors are excluded from chromosomes during mitosis, shedding new light on the process of mitotic bookmarking. During mitosis, most transcriptional machinery is inactivated, chromatin condenses, and most transcription factors are excluded from chromosomes. Given this how do new daughter cells re-establish their original transcription programme without the help of specific transcription factors? A select group of factors called mitotic bookmarkers, have been discovered that remain bound to mitotic chromosomes, leading to the possibility for new ways for maintaining transcriptional programmes. However many of the studies fail to take into account how chromosomes are studied in vitro, leading the researchers to conclude that most transcription factors remain associated with mitotic chromosomes in mouse embryonic stem cells.
A study has shown that Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) plays a role in lung disease caused by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and ozone (O3), by enhancing the immune response to environmental stress. TLRs recognise pathogen- or danger-associated molecular patterns, and TLR4, the prototypic receptor for LPS, also mediates inflammation after O3. However, regulation of TLR4 signaling was not fully understood. Researchers used in vivo animal models of TLR4-mediated inflammation to show that TLR5 affects the in vivo response to LPS, hyaluronan and O3. The study also showed that immune cells of human carriers of a dominant negative TLR5 allele have a decreased inflammatory response to O3 exposure ex vivo and LPS exposure in vitro. In addition, the study showed that TLR5 physically associates with TLR4, and biases TLR4 signaling towards the MyD88 pathway. The results suggest an updated paradigm for TLR4/TLR5 signaling in environmentally induced lung injury.
The human-specific gene ARHGAP11B is thought to have played a key role in the expansion and complexity of the human neocortex, which underlies higher cognitive abilities. In mice, the gene increased proliferative apical progenitors, but its effect on basal progenitors (thought to be instrumental for neocortical expansion) and upper-layer neurons, key features of an expanded neocortex, was unknown. In ferrets, which already exhibit several features of an expanded neocortex, ARHGAP11B markedly increased proliferative basal radial glia and extended the neurogenic period, resulting in an increase in upper-layer neurons and the expansion of the neocortex in both radial and tangential dimensions. These findings suggest that ARHGAP11B may be sufficient to promote the generation of basal radial glia with increased proliferative capacity in ferrets and potentially played a role in the expansion and complexity of the human neocortex.
Recent studies have found that the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) can activate the transcription factor ATF4 through mechanisms distinct from its canonical induction by the integrated stress response (ISR). Researchers compared ATF4-dependent transcriptional changes induced upon insulin-stimulated mTORC1 signaling to those activated by the ISR and found that the mTORC1-ATF4 pathway stimulates the expression of a subset of the ATF4 target genes induced by the ISR, including genes involved in amino acid uptake, synthesis, and tRNA charging. ATF4 is a metabolic effector of mTORC1 involved in promoting protein synthesis and stimulating cellular cystine uptake and glutathione synthesis. ATF4 is necessary for both the canonical regulation of protein synthesis and its induced synthesis of glutathione, the most abundant antioxidant in cells. These findings suggest that a specific subset of ATF4-dependent ISR-induced genes is likewise regulated by growth factor signaling through mTORC1 and is enriched for specific processes including aminoacyl tRNA synthesis, amino acid synthesis and uptake, and one-carbon metabolism. C/EBP isoforms are commonly binding to the promoters of these genes. Knockdown of any one of the C/EBP family members or ATF4 significantly changes expression of at least one other.
New research shows that Set7, a lysine methyltransferase, catalyzes the methylation of Gli3 full-length at the K436 and K595 sites in vitro and in vivo, aiding the enhancement of SHH signalling activation as a result. Methylation of Gli3 full-length can contribute to the growth and metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer. Furthermore, the researchers propose that Set7-mediated methylation is important for regulating the transactivity of Gli3 and the activation of SHH signalling in the development of cancers.
Researchers have uncovered a transcription factor, KLF5, that is repurposed to regulate cell cycle genes specifically in oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC). The integration of gene expression and chromatin accessibility profiles of human biopsies has implicated KLF5 in the transition from Barrett’s oesophagus (BO) to OAC. The discovery has potential prognostic significance as high levels of the new KLF5 target gene program correlate with poorer patient survival. The repurposing of KLF5 for novel regulatory activity in OAC offers new insights into the mechanisms behind disease progression in this subtype of oesophageal cancer, for which there currently are no tailored therapies.
Researchers have discovered that a protein called RhopH2, secreted by the Plasmodium falciparum parasite that causes malaria, helps the parasite to access crucial nutrients and dispose of harmful waste. The study found that RhopH2 interacts with other proteins involved in the alteration of the host cell in order to create pathways for the reception and expulsion of vital substances. Knocking out RhopH2 reduced the availability of vitamins and other cofactors, dropped the uptake of nutrients and slowed parasite growth. The study has direct genetic support for the function of the RhopH protein in new permeability pathways (NPPs).
The success of fertilization in angiosperms depends on the proper trajectory of pollen tubes through the pistil tissues to reach the ovules. A study shows that isotropic reorientation of cortical microtubules (CMTs) and cellulose microfibrils (CMFs) in aged papilla cells is accompanied by a tendency of pollen tubes to coil around the papillae. This coiled phenotype is associated with specific mechanical properties of the cell walls that provide less resistance to pollen tube growth. The study reveals an unexpected role for the KATANIN enzyme in pollen tube guidance on the stigma by ensuring mechanical anisotropy of the papilla cell wall. The study also examines the impact of stigma CMTs on pollen tube growth directionality and suggests a major role for cytoskeleton dynamics and mechanical properties of the cell wall in guiding early pollen tube growth in stigma papillae. The study also confirms the relation between CMTs and pollen behavior and suggests the impaired fertilization process in katanin1-5 ovules.
The study analyzed how different odor features are functionally integrated in the lateral horn (LH) of the vinegar fly, Drosophila melanogaster, in order to extract relevant information for accurate navigation. Inhibitory projection neurons (iPNs) were characterized as a subdivision of two morphological groups encoding positive hedonic valence or intensity information and conveying these features into separate domains in the LH. They process information on dual olfactory pathways and may accomplish different olfactory behaviors. The article provides evidence for a feature-based map in the LH and elucidates its role as the center for integrating behaviorally relevant olfactory information.
The enzyme γ-secretase is responsible for the breakdown of amyloid precursor protein (APP) into amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptides, which are linked to Alzheimer's disease. However, the mechanism by which γ-secretase produces Aβ had been unknown. In this study, it was found that γ-secretase catalysis is driven by three amino-acid-binding pockets in the enzyme's active site, which provide the mechanism by which γ-secretase cleaves APP in three amino acid increments. These three pockets are occupied by substrate before catalysis, suggesting a conformational change in the substrate is required for cleavage. Identifying the basic mechanism by which γ-secretase recognizes and cleaves the TMDs of substrates may aid in the development of disease-modifying therapeutics.
The inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA plays an important role in cognition through its effect on the output pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus. GABAB receptor activation leads to inhibition through GIRK/Kir3 channels. RGS7 is a regulator of this pathway, which is selectively modulated by membrane anchoring subunit R7BP. Ablation of Rgs7 sensitizes GIRK responses and slows channel deactivation, leading to decreased neuronal excitability and selective disruption of inhibitory forms of synaptic plasticity. Mice lacking Rgs7 exhibit deficits in learning and memory. GABABR-GIRK signaling is negatively modulated by the Regulators of G protein Signaling (RGS) proteins which accelerate G protein inactivation. Among the R7 family of RGS proteins, RGS7 is likely the dominant catalytic subunit in the hippocampus. RGS7 is important for modulating GABABR-GIRK signaling in hippocampal neurons, while R7BP fine-tunes the GABABR-GIRK signaling.
Yeast colonies have a rich exometabolome which is used preferentially over self-synthesis, indicating metabolite exchange for yeast growth. Yeast colonies are therefore not only exchanging metabolites, but also at growth-relevant quantities. A strategy was established to test this, through stochastic segregation of episomes, progressively introducing metabolic auxotrophies into a yeast population that self-establishes from an initially prototrophic cell. This strategy enabled co-growing auxotrophs to enter an efficient state of metabolic cooperation that facilitates growth based on non-cell-autonomous metabolism. Histidine, leucine, uracil, and methionine biosynthetic pathways were chosen for this study, as they could be interrupted by deletion of a single, non-redundant gene which codes for the metabolism of each nutrient. Co-growing prototrophic yeast cells primarily produce amino acid and nucleotide metabolites for themselves and export them at insufficient quantities to support the growth of co-growing cells. Metabolite exchange is frequently observed within bacterial microbial communities, but little is known about eukaryotic species. Metabolite exchange between different cells of the same species or tissue, exemplified in tumours, and between neurons and glial cells that exchange sugar metabolites are examples of mutually positive interactions where exchange concerns an overflow metabolite.
Researchers have developed a new device for monitoring both food intake and motivation in rodent home-cages, called the Feeding Experimentation Device version 3 (FED3). FED3 measures food intake and operant behavior in rodent home-cages with minimal experimenter intervention and has a programmable output for synchronizing behavior with optogenetic stimulation or neural recordings. FED3 is also open-source, allowing researchers to modify it to suit their needs. This device allows for more accurate and detailed monitoring of feeding behavior in rodents, which is important for understanding disorders such as obesity and anorexia nervosa. FED3 has been tested in several experiments, including measuring circadian patterns of food intake over multiple days, automated operant training, and closed-economy motivational testing. The data generated by FED3 can be processed and analyzed using open-source Python-based analysis software called FED3VIZ. This device is wire-free and fits inside traditional vivarium home-cages, allowing for easier quantification of circadian rhythms in both operant and feeding behavior.
A study has examined the effect of an oriental beetle sex pheromone on the nematode Pristionchus pacificus. The research found that while the beetle pheromone is attractive to P. pacificus adults, the pheromone arrests embryo development, paralyzes J2 larva, and inhibits the exit of dauer larvae. The study also uncovered a newly identified mutant, Ppa-obi-1, which revealed the molecular links between altered attraction towards the beetle pheromone and hypersensitivity to its paralyzing effects. Furthermore, the study suggests that the beetle host pheromone may be a species-specific volatile synomone that co-evolved with necromeny. The research shows the importance of understanding ecological interactions and evolutionary history to the understanding of the cellular and developmental processes of an organism.
The organization of bacterial cells into a rod shape is primarily determined by their cell wall sacculus, which is mostly circumferentially oriented around the rod, allowing it to resist internal osmotic pressure. The spatial coordination of peptidoglycan synthesis required for the maintenance of rod shape depends on MreB, an actin homolog. MreB polymerizes onto membranes as antiparallel double filaments, which move circumferentially around the width of rod-shaped cells in concert with MreC, MreD, and RodA/Pbp2. Interestingly, the motion of MreB and associated enzymes appears to be oriented circumferentially around the rod circumference, even though the organization of the glycan strands is not well-ordered. To understand how MreB filaments and associated PG synthases orient their motion, researchers altered the shape of Bacillus subtilis, and found that MreB motion is isotropic in round cells, but orientation is restored when rod shape is externally imposed. Together, this demonstrates that MreB orients along the greatest principal membrane curvature, allowing the rapid establishment and stable maintenance of emergent rod shape.
Deep learning techniques are being developed to help improve the efficiency and success rates of in vitro fertilization (IVF). A deep convolutional neural network (CNN) trained on single timepoint embryo images taken 113 hours post-insemination, was able to identify the highest quality embryo with an accuracy of 90%. Furthermore, a CNN trained to assess the implantation potential of embryos outperformed a group of trained embryologists. Inefficient embryo selection remains a challenge in IVF and previous methods have relied on visual assessment which can be highly practice-dependent and subjective. The use of deep learning techniques could provide a more objective and accurate approach to embryo selection in order to improve the success rates of IVF.
The protein complex Smc-ScpAB is known to promote the segregation of chromosomes in bacteria by compacting and resolving sister DNA molecules, but the mechanisms behind this are not well understood. Researchers have established a physical assay to investigate the binding of the Smc-ScpAB complex to native Bacillus subtilis chromosomes, by cross-linking the three ring interfaces within the Smc-ScpAB complex and isolating intact chromosomes under protein denaturing conditions. They found that the Smc-ScpA portion, cross-linked into covalent rings, remained associated with the chromosomal DNA, implying that most Smc-ScpAB is loaded onto chromosomes at specific parS sites near the replication origin. The researchers also identified a physical interaction between native Smc-ScpAB and chromosomal DNA fragments. These findings will help to improve understanding of the mechanisms behind chromosome segregation in bacteria, and may also have implications for related processes in eukaryotes.
In budding yeast, protein aggregation is a prevalent and highly coordinated event of early aging that is not solely associated with proteostasis deterioration. Instead, it initially benefits the cytosolic protein quality control but eventually becomes involved with age-associated loss of fitness. The age-associated protein gets retained in the early mother cell and is often asymmetrically inherited upon division. The formation of deposits was not associated with stress or general decline in proteostasis but rather with enhanced degradation of cytosolic proteasome substrates and unimpaired clearance of stress-induced protein aggregates. Deposit formation was dependent on Hsp42, which collected non-random client proteins of the Hsp104/Hsp70-refolding machinery, including the prion Sup35. The results suggest that protein aggregation is an early aging-associated differentiation event in yeast having a two-faceted role in organismal fitness.
A study has identified a new mutation in the gene ATG5 which has been linked to developmental problems and ataxia - a neurological disorder that impacts movement. This discovery further highlights the crucial role that autophagy, the process by which cells degrade and recycle cellular material, plays in preventing neurological diseases and maintaining healthy neurons. This study is particularly significant as it is the first report of genetically-inherited mutations in autophagy-related genes in humans. The research involved whole exome sequencing and molecular analysis of affected patients' cells, as well as experiments using yeast and fly models.
Neural responses in the motor cortex when listening to speech have been controversially interpreted as evidence that speech sounds are processed as articulatory gestures. This study used direct human cortical recordings while participants listened and spoke different speech sounds to determine what information is actually encoded by such neural activity. The results showed that during listening, activity in motor cortex was organized along acoustic features similar to auditory cortex, rather than along articulatory features as during speaking. This suggests that motor cortex represents auditory vocal information rather than articulatory representations of perceived actions in speech.
Research into the biological function of terrein, a secondary metabolite produced by the fungus Aspergillus terreus, has shown that its production is essential for ecological competition. Terrein causes fruit surface lesions and inhibits plant seed germination, while also providing moderate antifungal properties and supporting A. terreus growth under iron starvation. The production of terrein was induced by a lack of nitrogen/iron or elevated methionine levels and was dependent on specific nitrogen response or iron response regulators. The use of fungal secondary metabolites as pharmaceuticals has great potential, yet few examples have been found that demonstrate environmental or physiological relevance.
The study shows that when mice are taught a new motor task, they refine specific behavioural features. They learn to cope with task constraints by reducing the variability in sequence frequency while increasing variability in sequence duration. The variability in motor cortex and striatal projection neurons' activity was highest early in training but subsequently decreased with learning, without changes in average firing rate. As training progressed, the correlation between corticostriatal activity and behavioural variability increased and was associated with variability in frequency. Corticostriatal plasticity was required to decrease frequency variability but not variability in sequence duration. These findings suggest that corticostriatal dynamics encode the refinement of specific behavioural features that affect the probability of obtaining outcomes.
Researchers have discovered that the expression of the DAF-7/TGF-β cellular signalling pathway in the ASJ sensory neurons of the Caenorhabditis elegans male roundworms is modulated by multiple internal states and experiences such as sex, age and the presence of pathogenic bacteria. The pathway is important in regulating various aspects of these worms’ lives, notably mating, reproductive egg laying, feeding and avoidance of pathogenic bacteria. The investigation suggested aspects of behavioural decision-making may occur in the peripheral nervous system.
The document investigates the role of the Sharpin protein in regulating immune response and preventing cell death. The inactivating mutation of Sharpin (cpdm) causes multi-organ inflammation and dermatitis in mice. The study shows that TNF-dependent cell death is responsible for the inflammatory phenotype seen in cpdm mice, and that Tnfr1 deficiency suppresses the phenotype more efficiently than Il1r1 loss. The study also investigates the role of caspase-8, RIPK3 and MLKL in the inflammatory phenotype and provides insights into the developmental importance of SHARPIN. The paper also provides information on the role of other cytokines in the pathogenesis of cpdm dermatitis.
The article discusses the diversity and dynamics in the inactive conformations of dopamine D2 receptors (D2R) and their potential impact on rational drug discovery. The study reveals that non-selective antagonists derived from different scaffolds may favor distinct inactive conformations of D2R, and that divergent receptor conformations stabilized by Na+-sensitive and Na+-insensitive antagonists correspond to different degrees of inverse agonism. The authors propose that these findings are critical for rational drug discovery, as limiting a virtual screen to a single conformation will miss relevant ligands.
Neoblasts are adult stem cells found in planarians that can replace any missing tissue. However, the molecular pathways involved in the differentiation of neoblasts into postmitotic fates are not well understood. In this study, researchers used transcriptional profiling and RNA interference (RNAi) screening to identify markers and regulators of postmitotic progeny in planarians. They identified a planarian homolog to the MEX3 RNA-binding protein (Smed-mex3-1) as a key regulator of lineage progression, required for differentiated cells of multiple lineages while restricting the size of the stem cell compartment. These results identified mex3-1 as a cell fate regulator, broadly required for differentiation, and suggest that mex3-1 helps to mediate the balance between ASC self-renewal and commitment. The study may have implications for regenerative medicine and cancer biology, and planarians may become a powerful model system to study gene function, regeneration, and ASC biology.
The multiple PDZ domain protein (MPDZ) has been identified as a novel modulator of Notch signaling during angiogenesis. MPDZ enhances Notch signaling activity by physically interacting with the intracellular carboxyterminus of Delta-like ligands DLL1 and DLL4 and enables their interaction with the adherens junction protein Nectin-2. Inactivation of the MPDZ gene leads to impaired Notch signaling activity and increased blood vessel sprouting, thus demonstrating the importance of MPDZ in controlling ligand recruitment to adherens junctions. MPDZ regulates DLL4 cell surface localization through recruitment to the adherens junction protein Nectin-2. MPDZ silencing increases angiogenic potential and tumor angiogenesis, leading to an excessively branched and poorly functional vessel network resulting in tumor hypoxia. 
The protein MKLP2 is a kinesin-6 that plays a critical role in the metaphase-anaphase transition and cytokinesis during cell division. Cryo-electron microscopy and biophysical assays were conducted to dissect its mechanism during its ATPase cycle, revealing that it has many unique features compared to other kinesins. MKLP2 shares only ~35% sequence identity with kinesin-1, so what is known about other kinesin molecular function may not necessarily apply to this motor. MKLP2 is also found to be highly expressed in tumour tissue, and inhibition of MKLP2 by antimitotics has been explored. The biochemistry and molecular mechanisms of MKLP2 were investigated through these methods and it was found that the MKLP2 motor domain binding on the microtubule (MT) surface is shifted compared to other kinesins, and additional contacts between the MT and MKLP2 are formed. Additionally, the ADP state of MKLP2-MD demonstrates a relatively high affinity, in contrast to other kinesins where the ADP state is usually the kinesin weak binding state. The overall organisation of MKLP2-MD is similar compared to other kinesins, and the coordinated conformational changes that occur in other kinesins in response to MT and nucleotide binding also apply to MKLP2.
The document discusses research into the potential role of Prevotella copri in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The study involved 16S sequencing on stool samples from RA patients and controls, and shotgun sequencing on a subset of these samples. The results showed that presence of Prevotella copri was strongly correlated with new-onset untreated RA, and an increase in its abundance correlated with a reduction in Bacteroides and a loss of reportedly beneficial microbes in these patients. Colonization of mice with P. copri resulted in an increased sensitivity to chemically induced colitis. The study identifies a potential role for P. copri in the pathogenesis of RA.
Neurofeedback using real-time fMRI was used to train brain nodes in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) to alter abnormal connectivity patterns between resting state networks. The training resulted in significant long-term changes in correlations at the network level, which were not found in the control group. Changes in resting state connectivity were correlated to changes in behavior, making this method a potential intervention for individuals with ASD. The study also identified two target brain regions in individuals with ASD, which showed large under-connectivity compared to typically developing individuals, and were physically distant from each other. Feedback-induced behavioral changes have been shown to range from local changes, such as inducing color association in V1, to changes in high level functions such as attention and fear perception. The neurofeedback training in individuals with ASD resulted in increased connectivity between target regions and decreased correlations between target and control regions. The method involves approximating correlations using only two time points, every two seconds, for each time to repetition (TR) and analyzing the signals from the three ROIs in real-time. The study demonstrates the potential for this method to alter complex, clinically relevant network connectivity patterns in individuals with ASD and other disorders with underlying aberrant connectivity at their core.
The study analyses genomics data from solid tumors to investigate how changes in transcriptional networks contribute to tumor development. The results demonstrate that many transcriptional changes in tumors are linked to mutations disrupting regulatory interactions between unicellular and multicellular genes within human gene regulatory networks (GRNs). The study suggests that the contribution of somatic mutations to the rewiring of transcriptional networks during tumor development can be contextualized and estimated by their effect on gene regulatory networks pieced together during evolution, aiding the identification of key driver mutations. The study highlights the potential clinical value of this approach to identify important driver mutations and prioritizing compounds for targeted therapy, at the level of both patient populations and individual tumors.
The regulation of gene expression during early mammalian development is largely controlled by epigenetic mechanisms. Two enzymes, G9a and EZH2, play a key role in establishing specific chromatin modifications necessary for proper embryonic development. Loss of G9a or EZH2 results in upregulation of distinct gene sets involved in cell cycle regulation, germline development, and embryogenesis, leading to developmental delays. G9a-dependent chromatin modifications promote developmentally-linked gene silencing, marking promoters and gene bodies, and reinforcing repression at enhancer elements. These epigenetic modifications ultimately help prime gene regulatory networks for critical cell
Aicardi–Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a severe childhood inflammatory disorder that shows clinical and genetic overlap with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). AGS is caused by mutations in nucleic acid-degrading enzymes that lead to the accumulation of incompletely metabolized endogenous nucleic acid species. However, the identity and source of such immunogenic nucleic acid species remained undefined. In a study using genome-wide approaches, fibroblasts from AGS patients were found to be burdened by excessive loads of RNA:DNA hybrids, indicating that RNA:DNA hybrids may represent a common immunogenic form of nucleic acids in AGS. Additionally, AGS fibroblasts display pronounced and global loss of DNA methylation, which often occurs within DNA hypomethylated regions, providing the first evidence of epigenetic perturbations in AGS and further linking AGS to SLE. Overall, RNA:DNA hybrids and loss of DNA methylation represent potential targeting strategies for the treatment of AGS.
A new tool called e-HCFM has been developed for 3D fluorescence imaging and classification of microbial eukaryotes in environmental samples. This new method is able to accurately automatically classify organisms and provide quantitative data on their ultrastructures and interactions. The tool has been validated using plankton samples from the Tara Oceans expeditions and can be applied to samples from any aquatic environment. The relative slowness of the imaging technique can be overcome with widefield microscopy with deconvolution or spinning-disk scanning microscopy. The main advantage of e-HCFM is the use of 3D fluorescence microscopy in an automated and quantitative manner for environmental microbiology. It is necessary to bridge contemporary diversity studies to environmental eukaryotic cell biology in an ecological context. The environmental samples used in the study were collected during the Tara Oceans expeditions. A fluorescent labeling compound was developed to delineate the fine structures of all protist surfaces independently of their biochemistry.
Researchers have discovered that the widespread CRISPR-associated protein Csx3 is a ring nuclease that degrades cyclic tetra-adenylate (cA4), a molecule used by Type III CRISPR systems to signal viral infection and activate cellular defences. The enzyme responsible for degrading cA4 and returning the cell to a basal state is known as a ring nuclease, and the Csx3 family has now been identified as one such nuclease. This finding suggests that Csx3 is a crucial constituent of virus:host conflict and has implications for CRISPR-based immunity in several different organisms. The research team also proposes the name Crn3 (CRISPR-associated ring nuclease 3) for the Csx3 family.
Researchers have discovered the regulatory mechanism behind Aurora B kinase, an essential protein for the cell division process, which localises to specific parts of cells. The research reveals that the kinase is capable of phosphorylating substrates from a significant distance, indicating underlying activity regulation. The researchers reconstituted a bistable system in vitro to reveal the co-existence of high and low kinase activity states, sustained by a two-component kinase autoactivation mechanism. The scientists also developed a mechanistic theoretical model for spatial regulation of Aurora B phosphorylation. The results indicate that spatial regulation of Aurora B activity is precise, and co-ordinated by active kinase spread to different targets via a diffusion mechanism.
The role of Munc13s in large dense-core vesicle (LDCV) exocytosis was systematically analyzed using chromaffin cells lacking individual isoforms. The study found that particularly Munc13-2 plays a fundamental role in LDCV exocytosis, but in contrast to synapses lacking Munc13s, the corresponding chromaffin cells do not exhibit a vesicle docking defect. The study also demonstrated that ubMunc13-2 and Munc13-1 confer Ca2+-dependent LDCV priming with similar affinities, but distinct kinetics. Using a mathematical model, an early LDCV priming step that is strongly dependent upon Munc13s was identified. The findings demonstrate that the molecular steps of LDCV priming are very similar to those of synaptic vesicles (SVs) while the docking mechanisms are distinct. The study provides the first comprehensive analysis of all neuronal and neuroendocrine members of the Munc13 protein family, defining their respective roles in LDCV exocytosis.
The innervation of the mammary gland is controlled by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and Semaphorin family members that signal through PlexinA4. Deletion of PlexinA4 in both female and male embryos caused developmental hyperinnervation of the gland, which could be reduced by genetic co-reduction of BDNF. Moreover, in males, PlexinA4 ablation delayed axonal pruning, independently of the initial levels of innervation, supporting the idea that axonal pruning is regulated by the balance between trophic and repulsive signaling. These findings show that Semaphorin-PlexinA4 signaling regulates the sensory innervation of the mammary gland and that the repulsive factors may promote axonal pruning once trophic signaling is inhibited. During mammary gland development, BDNF is required at early stages to establish and maintain sensory innervation in both female and male embryos. In males, the elimination of the axons innervating the gland is the result of truncated TrkB (TrkB.T1) that sequesters BDNF, resulting in sexually dimorphic innervation.
Researchers have found that inhibitory neurons in the brain may be myelinated to a surprising extent, with half the myelin in layer 2/3 and a quarter in layer 4 observed ensheathing axons of inhibitory neurons. Hitherto, myelin was known to mostly ensheath excitatory axons connecting to subcortical regions and distant cortical areas. Myelin is believed to be important in increasing the speed of action potential propagation in long-axon connections. The study highlights the need for exploring alternative roles for myelin in neocortical circuits.

Researchers have developed a new method to stimulate hair cells in the inner ear using photonic force. Hair cells detect sounds by converting mechanical vibrations into electrical signals, and the mechanical receptors for these stimuli are hair bundles located on the surface of each hair cell. Current methods for stimulating hair bundles are too slow to encompass the frequency range of mammalian hearing and can produce inconsistent results. The researchers' new method uses an optical fiber with a tapered tip and ball lens to move individual hair bundles with photonic force. This technique allows for the rapid application of force to vestibular and cochlear hair cells and avoids the limitations and artifacts of current stimulation methods. The researchers demonstrated the efficacy of photonic stimulation in stimulating hair bundles from the inner and outer hair cells of the cochlea in rats and compared the results to hair bundles from bullfrog's sacculus. The method allows for probing hair-bundle physiology at previously inaccessible timescales and provides a means of assessing the viability of hair cells and the preservation of mechanotransduction following laser irradiation. However, there are still difficulties in fabricating a tapered optical fiber and calibrating photonic force.
Researchers have identified a central learning circuit that supports the learning of relief from tonic pain after injury, by using computational modelling of behavioural, physiological, and neuroimaging data. In two experiments in which subjects learned to terminate tonic pain in static and dynamic escape-learning paradigms, the researchers show that active relief-seeking involves a reinforcement learning process manifest by error signals observed in the dorsal putamen. The system uses an uncertainty ('associability') signal detected in pregenual anterior cingulate cortex that both controls the relief learning rate and endogenously and parametrically modulates the level of tonic pain. The results define a self-organising learning circuit that reduces ongoing pain when learning about potential relief.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are small molecules that fight against microbial infections. Studies have suggested that AMPs also kill cancer cells, but there has been no in vivo evidence to support this claim. In this study, the researchers used a Drosophila model to demonstrate the role of the AMP Defensin in controlling tumor progression. The results show that tumor necrosis factor mediates the exposure of phosphatidylserine (PS), which makes tumor cells selectively sensitive to the action of Defensin remotely secreted from tracheal and fat tissues. Defensin binds to PS-enriched areas, provoking cell death and tumor regression. The study provides the first in vivo demonstration for a role of an endogenous AMP as an anti-cancer agent, as well as a mechanism explaining tumor cell sensitivity to the action of AMPs.
The process of memory reconsolidation allows for established memories to be modified, but strong memories are more resistant to change. Researchers investigated the hypothesis that modulatory signals shape memory formation into a reconsolidation-resistant state. They found that the activation of the noradrenaline-locus coeruleus system during strong fear memory encoding increased mechanisms of stability at the expense of lability in the amygdala of rats, making them less vulnerable to post-reactivation interference. New memories undergo a stabilization period during which they are gradually consolidated into a stable long-term memory, and recall may cause the memory to return to an unstable state where it can be modified. This process of destabilization-reconsolidation allows memories to adaptively change. However, certain memories, like those resulting from extreme fear learning, can be pathological and resistant to change through reconsolidation. The strength of memory serves as a boundary condition to determine whether memory destabilization will occur after retrieval or not. This boundary condition is thought to be mediated in part by mechanisms that initialize destabilization. The noradrenaline-locus coeruleus system likely contributes to the formation of maladaptive reconsolidation-resistant fear memories. The study compares how animals fear conditioned with a mild (1 tone-shock pairing) or strong (10 tone-shock pairings) training protocol differ regarding plasticity mechanisms in the amygdala and the induction of destabilization. They found that GluA2 levels increase as a function of training strength, and the high levels found in the strong training group might reflect a resistance to memory destabilization.
The amyloid precursor protein (APP) plays an important role in synaptic function, linking it to Alzheimer's disease. A peptide named JCasp which is produced by the cleavage of APP, inhibits APP function and reduces glutamate release in hippocampal slices from wild-type mice. A study using proteomics indicates that APP interacts with proteins that mediate synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Furthermore, APLP2 can compensate for loss of APP function and that genetic ablation of both APP and APLP2 protein expression produces glutamatergic synaptic transmission deficits. The APP intracellular domain interacts with the exocytosis machinery and interacts proteins that regulate synaptic transmission. Understanding the roles played by APP and the genetic factors impacting its functions can help prevent the onset of AD.
A recent theory proposes that sound location in the horizontal plane is decoded from the relative summed activity of two populations in each hemisphere, whereas earlier theories hypothesized that the location was decoded from the identity of the most active cells. The nature of the neural code for interaural time difference (ITD) in mammals is still contentious because it is not known whether the auditory system sums activity or uses cell identity in decoding responses. The authors studied the performance of different decoders in increasingly complex situations, including variations in spectrum, background noise, and head-related acoustic filtering. They found that summing cell responses is strongly suboptimal and that heterogeneity in tunings is information rather than noise.
The zebra finch presents a unique opportunity to study the neural mechanisms that couple motor skill learning and variability. The production of learned song and induction of vocal variability are instantiated in distinct circuits that converge on a motor cortex analogue controlling vocal output. To probe the interplay between learning and variability, intracellular recordings were made from neurons in this area to determine how their inputs from the functionally distinct pathways change throughout song development. The study found that inputs that drive stereotyped song-patterns are strengthened and pruned, while inputs that induce variability remain unchanged. A network model showed that strengthening and pruning of action-specific connections reduces the sensitivity of motor control circuits to variable input and neural ‘noise’. This identifies a simple and general mechanism for learning-related regulation of motor variability.
A study utilizing continuous measures of memory retrieval has identified three components of episodic memory: retrieval success, precision, and vividness. Retrieval success was associated with hippocampal activity, retrieval precision with activity in the angular gyrus, and vividness judgments with activity in the precuneus. The study highlights the need for more sensitive, continuous measures of memory performance to dissociate memory retrieval components and understand the roles of brain regions within the retrieval network. The study found that retrieval success, precision, and vividness are moderately correlated, but a significant proportion of variance in each retrieval measure remains unexplained when predicted by the other two measures.
The activity patterns of the V0v interneurons, a key class of commissural interneurons that control left-right coordination during locomotion in animals with bilateral symmetry, were examined in adult zebrafish. The V0v interneurons were found to consist of three sub-types, each engaged sequentially at slow, intermediate, and fast locomotor speeds. The three sub-classes could be distinguished based on their activity pattern, recruitment frequency, and the amplitude of their synaptic inputs. This finding reveals a novel organizational principle for this class of interneurons in adult vertebrates and their recruitment pattern as a function of locomotor speed.
Researchers have uncovered how RNA helps control protein synthesis and function by stimulating the movement of mRNA to specific locations within cells. Via the microtubule network responsible for mRNA transport, the binding of RNA, be it hairy or the 59-nucleotide I-factor localisation signal used, prompts the activation of dynein motility, according to the study. The research could pave the way for new therapies for serious health issues including neurological disorders.
Galectin-8 has been identified as a potential drug target for the prevention of diseases associated with excessive bone loss. Research showed that mice overexpressing galectin-8 exhibited accelerated osteoclast activity and bone turnover, resulting in reduced bone mass, similar to cases of postmenopausal osteoporosis and cancerous osteolysis. Galectin-8 was found to directly affect primary cultures of osteoblasts, leading to the secretion of the osteoclastogenic factor RANKL, thereby resulting in enhanced differentiation into osteoclasts of the bone marrow cells co-cultured with galectin-8-treated osteoblasts. The study highlighted the potential regulation of bone mass by animal lectins.
A study has found evidence that the Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional coactivator, known to promote the development of cancer and identified as a mediator of cell fate decisions, is not sufficient on its own to promote growth in otherwise normal tissue, at least not in the liver. The research also found that to move to promote growth, a second signal provided by tissue damage or inflammation is required. Yap activation promotes cell proliferation, survival, stemness and tumour development, but there is no evidence that Yap can induce apoptosis in vivo. It follows that Yap also has the apparent ability to function during homeostasis and regulate the Hippo pathway.
Polygenic scores based on genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are being used in fields such as human genetics and sociology for phenotypic prediction. However, recent research has shown that polygenic scores have limited portability across different genetic ancestries, and they also depend on characteristics such as socio-economic status, age, and sex. These findings create potential serious inequities in the use of polygenic scores in future clinical applications. Additionally, the prediction accuracy of polygenic scores can depend on the design of GWAS and the characteristics of individuals in which they are conducted. While PGS has been adopted in clinical studies, it remains less predictive in individuals of non-European ancestry, limiting its usefulness. Therefore, there is a need to expand GWAS to include more diverse ancestries to prevent underappreciated challenges with GWAS-based phenotypic prediction. The genotype-environment interactions (GxE) in humans also affect the portability of PGS across environments, as the extent of environmental variability differs between GWAS and prediction groups. The prediction accuracy differs when GWAS is conducted in unrelated individuals or in pairs of siblings, highlighting the importance of genetic effects that are included in some study designs and not others. Indirect genetic effects from relatives, assortative mating, varying levels of genetic and environmental variance, GxE interaction effects, and undetected confounding are contributing factors that affect the prediction accuracy of PGS in unpredictable ways. Overall, it is essential to expand GWAS efforts to include more diverse ancestries and examine the reliability of PGS in different sample groups with varying characteristics such as sex, age, and socio-economic status.
A new study has revealed that dendritic spines are present in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) dopamine neurons of mice. These structures have a significant impact on how synaptic input shapes the excitability of neurons. Researchers used two-photon laser scanning microscopy to examine the dendritic spines’ density and morphology on dopamine neurons in live brain slices from mice of varying ages. The density of spines ranged from 0.5 per 10µm to 4.4 per 10µm, with an average of 2.08 per 10µm. Spines were also present in perfusion-fixed tissue. The study provides evidence that activation of spines during slow pacemaking enhances spine Ca2+ and that spine Ca2+ signals are less sensitive to hyperpolarization than shaft synapses. Pacemaking in dopamine neurons lead to the periodic enhancement of Spine Ca2+ during the spike cycle, as suggested by the recruitment of NMDA receptors and voltage-gated conductances.
The timing of DNA ejection from phages can affect the decision between lytic and lysogenic infection, and can be synchronized or desynchronized based on the mobility of encapsidated DNA, which is regulated by environmental factors like temperature and extra-cellular ionic conditions. The mechano-regulation of DNA ejection dynamics can influence viral replication and the lytic-lysogenic cell decision process. Scientists have designed a new assay using ultra-sensitive micro-ITC to determine ejection dynamics from phage lambda with the aim of differentiating between populations with synchronized and desynchronized ejection events.
Despite limitations in measuring neural activity, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has proven to be an incredibly useful tool in understanding cognitive processes and decoding neural activity. Multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) and representational similarity analysis (RSA) have helped in inferring neural function and cortical representation. The success of fMRI implies that certain neural coding schemes are more likely than others, with the neural code needing to be somehow spatially and temporally smooth. Code involving rate coding, in which the frequency at which neurons fire is a function of the intensity of a stimulus, is consistent with the success of fMRI as changes in firing rate can be recovered by fMRI as more blood flows to active cells. Nonetheless, despite these successes, fMRI has limitations and places hard limits on what it can measure. 

Keywords: functional magnetic resonance imaging, neural coding schemes, multivariate pattern analysis, representational similarity analysis, hard limits.
Scientists have gained a greater understanding of how the CRISPR-Cas system, which provides immunity against viruses and other mobile genetic elements in bacteria and archaea, captures new DNA sequences and integrates them into the genome, a process known as 'Acquisition' or 'Adaptation'. Researchers demonstrated that Cas1, one of the proteins involved in the system, catalyses an efficient trans-esterification reaction on branched DNA substrates, which represents the reverse- or disintegration reaction. The Cas1 and Cas2 proteins are required for "Adaptation" or "Acquisition" and are the most universally conserved of all the CRISPR-associated genes (cas genes). These genes are important for capturing new DNA sequences from mobile genetic elements, followed by their integration into the host genome. 

The impact of glycosylation on the SARS-CoV-2 virus is still unclear. Researchers expressed different glycoforms of the Spike protein and ACE2 in CRISPR-Cas9 glycoengineered cells to develop SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus and found that N- and O-glycans played a major role in regulating viral entry. Blocking N-glycan biosynthesis at the oligomannose stage reduced viral entry into ACE2 expressing cells. The glycosylation of ACE2 did not impact viral entry. Glycan engineering of viral Spike protein dramatically affected viral entry, with most viral function lost upon inhibiting N-glycan elaboration. The study suggests chemical inhibitors of glycosylation may be evaluated for the treatment of COVID-19.
The assembly and maturation of viruses such as HIV-1 involves structural switches that trigger local and global rearrangements to produce infectious particles. The C-terminal domain (CTD) of the capsid region and the first spacer peptide (SP1) of the precursor structural protein, Gag, contain an assembly and maturation switch. This switch has a bipartite character, whereby the SP1 spacer is critical for immature virus assembly and the 6-helix bundle regulates proteolysis during maturation. The crystal structure of the CTD-SP1 Gag fragment is a goblet-shaped hexamer that forms a flattened version of the immature HIV-1 Gag lattice. This structure generates insight into how loss of curvature in the crystal lattice may be accommodated by the subunits, as well as specifies how local conformational changes in the CA-SP1 switch promote Gag assembly, drive large-scale capsid rearrangements, and regulate proteolysis during maturation. Finally, this paper gains new insights into the mechanism of action of maturation inhibitors.
Researchers have used multi-electrode recordings from an identified ganglion cell type, visual stimulation targeted at individual cone photoreceptors, and a hierarchical computational model to determine the transformation of visual signals flowing from the input to the output of the primate retina. By doing so, they were able to reveal the presence of nonlinear subunits in the circuity of OFF midget ganglion cells, which are responsible for high-resolution vision. These findings provide new insights into the spatial structure of linear and nonlinear encoding at the scale of complete circuits.
The heart contains multiple cell types, besides cardiomyocytes, that play important roles in repair, regeneration, and disease. However, a comprehensive understanding of the interaction between these cell types is lacking. In this study, the researchers performed single-cell RNA sequencing of non-cardiomyocyte cells and fibroblast lineage cells from murine hearts after sham or myocardial infarction surgery. They found >30 populations representing nine cell lineages, including a previously undescribed fibroblast lineage trajectory and novel myofibroblast subtypes. The data highlight the dynamics of myeloid and fibroblast lineages after cardiac injury and provide an entry point for deeper analysis of cardiac homeostasis, inflammation, fibrosis, repair, and regeneration. The study will contribute to the development of molecular or cellular targets for enhancing heart repair and regeneration in humans.
The study investigates the need for proxy measures for HIV rebound competent reservoir (RCR) that can predict viral rebound after combined antiretroviral treatment (cART) interruption. Macaques infected with SIVmac239 virus were treated with cART and received different levels of viral dissemination and persistence leading to varied levels of SIV DNA maintained during treatment. The study shows that RCR can be established soon after infection and a large fraction of persistent viral DNA that accumulates over time makes relatively little contribution to viral rebound. The study also suggests that understanding how surrogate measures relate to the frequency of HIV reactivation can facilitate accurate evaluation of novel therapies to reduce RCR. Additionally, the study shows that the rebound competent reservoir may be saturable and can be seeded early in the course of infection.
The egg-laying behavior of C. elegans is controlled by a small neural circuit consisting of two serotonergic neurons (HSNs), six cholinergic neurons (VCs), and four uv1 neuroendocrine cells, which regulate egg laying. Optogenetic manipulation of the circuit function and optical recording were used to analyze the Ca2+ activity and circuit activity in moving animals during active and inactive egg-laying states. The results revealed that the HSNs initiate an active state of rhythmic activity, while the VC motor neurons promote this state by slowing the locomotion during egg release. The uv1 neuroendocrine cells mechanically sense the passage of eggs and release tyramine to inhibit egg laying. The study has identified the signals that regulate the circuit from the locomotion central pattern generator to produce active and inactive states.
Microbial diversity is linked to a range of outcomes, but the mechanisms behind it are debatable. Simple models do not allow for a large number of species to coexist, but it has been shown that metabolic trade-offs can allow for unlimited diversity. This study investigates how variable nutrient supply affects diversity and demonstrates that metabolic trade-offs can still support high diversity communities in serial dilution culture. The results show that there is no general relationship between nutrient supply and diversity, and a variety of factors influence this relationship. The study also identifies an 'early-bird' effect in which species that efficiently consume initially abundant nutrients gain a population advantage early in the batch that affects the diversity.
Researchers have found a way to provide artificial touch to humans with hand amputations using a neuromorphic mechano-neuro-transduction (MNT) process. By modulating the electrical spikes delivered to the human median nerve using percutaneous microstimulation in four intact subjects and via implanted intrafascicular stimulation in one transradial amputee, the subjects were able to discriminate textures of surfaces. The MNT-evoked EEG activity showed responses that were similar to natural mechanical tactile stimulation. These findings may enable the development of the next generation of neuro-prosthetic hands, which can restore sensory perception for users.
Superfast muscles (SFM) are a type of synchronous muscle found in various vertebrate lineages, capable of contraction rates up to 250 Hz. SFMs have been identified in sound-producing organs in fish, birds, and mammals, playing a crucial role in vocalizations and sound production. SFMs share functional adaptations that minimize excitation-contraction coupling transduction times. They may have developed through independent evolutionary events and operate under constraints set by the architecture of synchronous muscle. A study on zebra finch and Daubenton's bat shows that SFMs express myosin heavy chain genes that are evolutionarily and ontologically distinct. Common adaptations in the excitation-contraction coupling pathway are shared by all SFMs, limiting their force and power production.
This paper looks at the evolutionary and developmental mechanisms that lead to the differentiation of sister cell types, focusing on retinal photoreceptors and bipolar cells as a model system. The authors found that while the two cell types have divergent transcriptomes, they share remarkably similar cis-regulatory grammars marked by enrichment of K50 homeodomain binding sites. However, cell class-specific enhancers are distinguished by enrichment of E-box motifs in bipolar cells and Q50 homeodomain motifs in photoreceptors. The differential partitioning of Q50 motifs in photoreceptor and bipolar cell-specific enhancers was a key evolutionary innovation contributing to transcriptomic divergence between the two cell classes. The authors isolated specific bipolar cell populations from mouse retina and obtained profiles of open chromatin and gene expression to ascertain the transcriptional differences between photoreceptor and bipolar cells. The transcriptomes of bipolar cells and photoreceptors were found to be significantly divergent, despite various functional and morphological similarities between the two cell classes, while the transcriptomes of the two categories of bipolar cells were quite similar.
Artemisinin-resistant malaria has become a serious problem in Southeast Asia and it is feared it may spread to Africa, where it could have disastrous consequences for childhood mortality. Researchers at the University of Oxford have examined the origins of the mutations causing the current epidemic of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum in Southeast Asia and have found that the variants causing resistance in Southeast Asia are “not currently undergoing strong selection in Africa”. The researchers’ genomic analysis suggests that artemisinin-resistant malaria has resulted from a “soft selective sweep involving at least 20 independent kelch13 mutations” rather than the emergence of a single potent mutation.

Researchers have discovered that basal ganglia control signals help brain machine interfaces effectively trigger neuroprosthetics in paralysed patients. The basal ganglia, an area in the brain, controls the scaling of motor vigour, including the amplitude and speed of a movement or gripping force, and gives signals that index motor effort, influencing force in manual grips. The study analysed the correlation between the neuronal activity recorded by electrodes implanted in participants and gripping force, and discovered that changes in LFP in the gamma and beta bands represent potential control signals for the motor plant. Together, this information could be used to create stable and high-performance control signals for BMI-driven neuroprosthetic grasping.
Researchers at the University of Bristol have identified a new mechanism by which two proteins interact to regulate immune system and growth factor signalling, protecting against inflammation and cancer. The scientists found that the proteins, iRhom2 and TACE, work together throughout the life cycle of TACE, which is responsible for releasing cytokines and epidermal growth factor signals from the cell's membrane. By studying immunity to diseases such as bacterial infection and inflammatory arthritis, the researchers discovered how iRhom2 stabilises TACE at the cell surface and protects it from lysosomal degradation when it's phosphorylated by ERK1/2. They also ascertained that absence of iRhom2 inhibits TACE maturation thereby blocking key immune system signalling required to combat disease.
A study of deep-sea anglerfish symbionts has found that their luminescent bacterial symbionts are not vertically transmitted, but rather acquired from the environment. The study analyzed bacteria-host codivergence across six diverse anglerfish genera and found no statistical support for codivergence, suggesting symbionts are environmentally acquired. The symbionts have undergone extreme genome reduction and are obligately dependent on their hosts for growth. The anglerfish symbiont genomes retain genes predicted to be under selection outside of the host, which suggests these bacteria may be environmentally acquired. The study found little congruence between host and symbiont phylogenies, indicating symbiont species have not co-diverged with their host, and suggesting they may be acquired from persistent environmental populations. The study also suggests that fish known to harbor luminous bacteria regularly release symbionts into the environment, which may explain how anglerfish symbionts are acquired from the environment.
This article describes a study on the predictive power of thermodynamic models of gene regulation in eukaryotes, specifically in the context of embryonic development in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The authors found that no available thermodynamic or non-equilibrium MWC model could explain the transcriptional dynamics of the hunchback gene, and proposed a different model in which Bicoid and Zelda actively assist the energetically costly process of making chromatin accessible, possibly through histone acetylation. The authors also discuss the challenges posed by eukaryotic transcriptional regulation, including the role of chromatin accessibility and the need for non-equilibrium models, and describe their experimental approach, which involved measuring time-varying concentrations of Bicoid and Zelda and hunchback transcriptional activity in living Drosophila embryos.
The polarity of the cannabinoid type one receptor (CB1R) is only stable in axons, where it downregulates neurotransmitter release, but how this happens is unclear. A study used time-resolved imaging to determine the trafficking of CB1Rs in rat hippocampal neurons and found that CB1R delivery is biased towards the axon and that surface-expressed CB1Rs are more stable in axons than dendrites. This mechanism is regulated by the CB1R C-terminus and involves the Helix 9 (H9) domain. CB1R function is related to pain, appetite, mood, and memory, and modulation of endocannabinoid pathways is of intense interest as a potential therapeutic target. H9 plays a role in CB1R surface expression and endocytosis but CB1R polarity is determined by a novel determinant in the C-terminus of CB1R at least in part. H9 plays a role in stabilizing CB1R at the surface of both axons and dendrites.
This document discusses the evolution and genetic exchange of Albugo candida, a plant pathogen with a wide host range. The parasite consists of multiple races, each specialized on distinct host species. Although the races are genetically diverged, introgression has occurred, enabling the exchange of effector repertoires and potentially the evolution of novel races. The suppression of host innate immunity may facilitate cohabitation and genetic exchange between races. The study found that the races are not genetically isolated despite having non-overlapping host ranges. The genome sequence of five isolates was analyzed to determine the genetic exchange between them. Additionally, the document discusses the implications of introgression for pathogen evolution in an agro-ecological environment.
Researchers have discovered that sublethal activation of Caspase-3 plays a critical role in mediating Myc-induced genetic instability and transformation in mammalian cells, making it an essential facilitator in the process. Myc is widely understood to be one of the most important oncogenes in cancer biology due to its prompting of cellular proliferation and promoting stem cell self-renewal under normal circumstances. When Myc is overexpressed in a cell, it can increase genomic instability and promote carcinogenesis. However, the research shows that mammalian cells that survive the activation of the apoptotic cascade and incur increased genetic instability subsequently have a higher susceptibility to cancer.
A new study has found evidence that deforestation is associated with short-term increases, but long-term decreases confirmed malaria case incidences in Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR). The findings highlight the influence of forest activities on malaria transmission in the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS). The research examined the relationship between deforestation and malaria incidence by combining high-resolution forest coverage data and monthly malaria incidence data from 2013 to 2016 from two separate regions in the GMS. Overall, the forest cover was denser in the north than in the south and deforestation over this period was higher in the north than in the south.
The article discusses the concept of symmetry and symmetry breaking in multisite modification of proteins by enzymes. The authors examine different classes of modification networks and show how symmetry breaking can lead to new capabilities, ordering of multisite modification, and impact information processing and cell signaling networks. The authors also discuss the relevance of the results in situations where exact symmetry is not present and its potential for engineering in synthetic biology and chemistry. The article presents basic models of multisite modification and evaluates the possibility of spontaneous symmetry breaking in reaction pathways. The authors suggest that symmetry breaking could provide a natural mechanism for the creation of ordered multisite modification systems from random ones, which could explain the various degrees of ordering encountered in cells. The article details the types of symmetries encountered and the various consequences of such behavior for biological systems and cellular signaling pathways.
The abundance of organelles can fluctuate due to changes in the mechanisms that increase or decrease their numbers. A stochastic model was built to identify these fluctuations and evaluate their impact on the precision of cell biological processes. The model predicts the size of experimentally measured fluctuations in the Golgi apparatus and vacuoles. Peroxisome abundance fluctuations were observed to increase when cells are in fatty acid-rich environments, indicating that peroxisome biogenesis switches from de novo synthesis to primarily fission. The study provides a framework for exploring stochastic organelle biogenesis and using fluctuations to understand the pathways that control the abundance of subcellular structures.
Optical electrophysiology techniques have been developed to study activity-dependent modulation of ion channels, with a particular focus on Nav1.7, a channel that plays a significant role in mediating pain sensation. The all-optical electrophysiology techniques provide a favorable tradeoff between throughput and information content for studies of NaV channels and may provide a functional surrogate for standard voltage-clamp protocols. Optical measurements reveal that a sustained depolarization strongly potentiates the inhibitory effect of a Nav1.7-specific blocker. The researchers applied the Optopatch spiking HEK cell platform to study NaV1.7 and demonstrate its applicability to Nav1.5 as well.
Research has shown that gap junctions (GJs) between the rod and cone photoreceptors play an important role in vision by allowing for communication of electrical and molecular signals. While the anatomical substrate for these GJs exists, the full impact on cone function is not clear. The study found that rod input increased spontaneously in cones upon obtaining intracellular access and that fully coupled cones acquire a rod-like phenotype. The findings suggest that rod-cone coupling may play a significant role in vision and that the impact on vision may be context-dependent. The study also found evidence that the peculiar features of cones, such as high light sensitivity and slow kinetics, can be explained by rod input fed into the cone pathway through these GJs.
Researchers have generated a panel of seven fully characterised chimpanzee-induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines derived from healthy donors to facilitate comparative genomics studies in primates. The low within-species regulatory variation in iPSCs allowed the researchers to identify inter-species regulatory differences, which were previously difficult to study due to practical and ethical concerns surrounding working with non-human primates. iPSCs provide a viable means of circumventing such concerns and limitations with the potential to explore developmental and cell lineage determination pathways. To confirm pluripotency and test differentiation capabilities, teratoma formation assays were carried out in four of the lines using immunodeficient mice, which showed the iPSC lines to be capable of generating tumours containing tissues of endodermal, ectodermal and mesodermal origins. An iPSC-based system for comparative genomic studies in primates will allow researchers to compare regulatory pathways and complex phenotypes in humans and our close evolutionary relatives using appropriate models for different tissues and cell types.
Early life adversity experienced by female baboons can have intergenerational effects on the survival of their offspring, according to a study published in the journal Nature Communications. The research drew on a 45-year dataset of a wild, long-lived primate, examining five types of early adversity experienced by mothers and four experienced by the offspring themselves. Maternal death and the birth of a close-in-aged younger sibling were found to have a strong negative effect on offspring survival in the first four years of their lives. These findings suggest that the effects of early adversity can be felt beyond the immediate offspring, potentially perpetuating throughout generations.
Researchers from Nagoya University and Hokkaido University have found a "novel mechanism" for how cells coordinate during collective cell migration, referring to the CFL (contact following locomotion) that can induce a "non-trivial collective behaviour" in migrating cells, causing them to move in a polar or ordered way rather than randomly. They also report that, within this polar order phase, there are different sub-populations of cells that exhibit transversal motions. These findings deepen the understanding of the collective migration of eukaryotic cells, and could be helpful in developing ways to support wound healing, tumour progression, and morphogenesis.
The reliability of cell fate decisions in response to fluctuating signals is poorly understood. Using budding yeast as a model system, researchers found that the decision for cell cycle commitment is determined by the time integration of its triggering signal, Cln3, and identified the Start repressor, Whi5, as the integrator. The decision is made only when phosphorylated Whi5 reaches a threshold, which the cells adjust by modulating Whi5 concentration in different nutrient conditions to coordinate growth and division. The study demonstrates that signal integration, previously found in decision-making behaviors of animals, is adopted at the cellular level to reduce noise and minimize uncertainty.
The Nuclear Pore Complexes (NPCs) are a key cellular transporter that controls nucleocytoplasmic transport in eukaryotic cells, but the transport mechanism is not yet fully understood. The NPCs have a central role in transport of relatively small cargoes up to several nanometers in size, or approximately 30-40 kD, occurs by pure diffusion, without specific interactions with the NPC constituents. Transport of larger macromolecules, such as import of transcription factors and export of mRNA particles is tightly controlled by the NPC. The centerpiece of the NPC transport is the assembly of intrinsically disordered polypeptides, known as FG nucleoporins, lining its passageway. The physics of the nucleoporin is still not clear, as the conformations and collective dynamics during transport are difficult to assess in vivo. In vitro investigations provide partially conflicting results, but it is shown that the spatial organization of FG nucleoporin assemblies with the transport proteins can be understood within a first principles biophysical model with a minimal number of key physical variables, such as the average protein interaction strengths and spatial densities.
Saccadic eye movements are characterized by suppression of visual information, which is thought to maintain perceptual stability; however, it is difficult to explain the behavioral and neural dynamics of saccadic suppression purely in terms of perceptual stability. A new study suggests that efficient sensorimotor processing may give rise to this suppression, indicating that the brain shares neural resources for perception and control. Using a closed-loop control model of saccades, the authors show theoretically that a Bayesian estimator would reduce the weight of sensory information around the time of saccades, resulting in signal-dependent noise and sensorimotor delays. This reduction parallels the observed behavioral suppression and neural responses to visual stimuli. The study suggests that saccadic suppression originates as the result of efficient sensorimotor processing, and discusses how this theoretical result may arise from shared neural resources supporting perceptual and motor systems.
The document describes a study that investigates whether low-frequency cortical activity in the brain reflects a general mechanism for sequence chunking and can track chunks defined by temporarily learned artificial rules. The experiment recorded the neural responses of participants to a sequence of spoken words, and two tasks required them to group pairs of semantically similar or dissimilar words into chunks. The study found that cortical activity can track chunks constructed based on task-related rules and potentially reflects a general mechanism for chunk-level representations. The study also discusses various models that attempt to explain how the brain processes sequences and the differences between them.
The transient receptor potential (TRP) channel, specifically TRPV1, is critical in the sensation of pain and temperature. The study examines how TRPV1 integrates different stimuli and senses temperature. The authors show that external sodium ions stabilize the TRPV1 channel in a closed state, and removing the external ion leads to channel activation. Results reveal that binding of sodium to an extracellular site exerts allosteric control over temperature-sensor activation, as does the binding of tarantula toxin to the external pore. The study finds that multiple steeply temperature-dependent transitions are allosterically coupled to an opening transition. The external pore has a critical external Na+ binding site that must be occupied for the channel to remain closed at room temperature and be available for opening by noxious heat. Exchanging external Na+ with NMDG+ leads to spontaneous opening of the TRPV1 channel at room temperature.
The document discusses the human ability to extract coherent patterns (or "figures") from overlapping background signals in complex acoustic environments. The study uses a new stimulus, the Stochastic Figure-Ground (SFG), to examine this ability and tests segregation behavior in the context of various spectral and temporal perturbations. Results demonstrate that listeners are sensitive to the emergence of figures and can tolerate perturbations, and a model based on the detection of temporal coherence across frequency channels can account for the data. The study highlights the existence of automatic auditory segregation mechanisms that are highly sensitive to correlations across frequency and time.
Marine animals larvae identify a location to undergo metamorphosis based on specific bacteria present on the sea floor. This microbe-animal interaction is critical for marine life cycles, but the biochemical cues from bacteria that induce metamorphosis have been unknown. Using the example of the tubeworm Hydroides elegans and the bacterium Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea, researchers have identified the novel effector protein, Mif1, which is delivered by the bacterium via contractile injection systems and is necessary for inducing metamorphosis. The study provides the first proteinaceous bacterial cue identified that stimulates animal metamorphosis and the direct visualization of this effector in the tube lumen of a contracted injection system. The findings suggest that rather than solely puncturing and depolarizing larval membranes, which was previously hypothesized as the mechanism for metamorphosis induction, the delivered Mif1 protein could have enzymatic activity.
A computational approach has been developed for constructing 3D atlases from 2D-derived atlases, with the aim of reducing artifacts and improving accuracy. This was achieved by identifying anatomical boundaries in underlying imaging data and using them to guide 3D transformations, which also allowed extension of atlases to complete edge regions. The approach was applied to the Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas and yielded more comprehensive and accurate atlases. The resulting 3D atlases were validated using imaging data from 15 whole mouse brains, which showed qualitative and quantitative improvements in alignment between atlas and anatomical boundaries. The pipeline is available as the MagellanMapper software, and the eight 3D reconstructed ADMBA atlases are also provided as a resource for whole-organ quantitative analysis between samples and across development.
Sponges and ctenophores, the sister taxa to all remaining animal phyla, lack the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway, which is responsible for controlling gene expression in response to low oxygen levels in other animals. This suggests that the last common ancestor of all living animals also lacked the HIF pathway and could have metabolised aerobically under very low environmental oxygen concentrations. Laboratory experiments on the marine sponge Tethya wilhelma showed that the organism can maintain normal transcription under oxygen levels down to 0.25% of modern atmospheric saturation, the lowest levels investigated, consistent with the absence of any HIF-like pathway. The absence of the HIF pathway in sponges and ctenophores also suggests that they are unable to modulate their transcriptional state in response to low oxygen levels in the same way as other animal phyla.
RhoGTPases are molecular switches that cycle between active and inactive states, and are essential for directing cytoskeletal rearrangements in cells. Guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) are thought to interact exclusively with inactive RhoGTPases, serving as passive shuttles. However, recent research has suggested that GDIs may interact with active GTPases in vivo. In this study, researchers developed methods to directly image vertebrate RhoGTPases in vivo and on lipid bilayers in vitro, and found that GDIs can extract both inactive and active RhoGTPases. The extraction of active RhoGTPase contributes to their spatial regulation around cell wounds, indicating that GDI directly contributes to the spatiotemporal patterning of RhoGTPases by removing active RhoGTPases from the plasma membrane.
This document discusses the molecular mechanism of kinesin, an ATPase motor protein that walks along microtubules. The document explains that the nucleotide binding pocket in the motor head is the most dynamic part of the molecule, and its internal motions actively drive nucleotide processing events. The document also discusses the conformational changes in different nucleotide or structural states and the motion of the motor head relative to the microtubule. The document concludes that the dynamic nature of the kinesin mechanism provides the flexibility necessary for walking in the crowded cellular environment.
Researchers have used zebrafish to find that Gdf3, a member of the TGFbeta superfamily, is an essential cofactor of Nodal for the establishment of the embryonic axis. Mutants generated by the researchers found that homozygous zygotic mutants develop normally with no alterations in left-right patterning. However, zebrafish mutants that eliminated maternal stores of Gdf3 have a highly pronounced embryonic lethal phenotype. The study shows that Gdf3 is required only early in development and mutants are viable and fertile beyond that. The findings of the research demonstrate that neither Nodal nor Gdf3 can function without the other in fundamental patterning of the vertebrate embryonic axis.
This document describes a study using optical tweezers to measure the forces generated by ribosomes during mRNA translocation. The study found that ribosomes function as a Brownian ratchet and generate around 13 pN of force. The study also found that mRNA translocation occurs in a single step and that the applied force affects the rate and equilibrium constants of the reaction. The study provides a basis for characterizing the ribosome's full mechano-chemical cycle and sheds light on the mechanism of translocation.
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase (Pol) II consists of 52 conserved repeats containing the consensus sequence Tyr1-Ser2-Pro3-Thr4-Ser5-Pro6-Ser7. Post-translational modifications of the CTD coordinate various steps of mRNA maturation. Tyr1 phosphorylation (Tyr1P), a newly discovered modification, is predominantly found in antisense orientation at promoters, but also specifically enriched at active enhancers in mammalian cells. Mutations of Tyr1 to phenylalanine prevent the formation of the hyper-phosphorylated Pol IIO form and result in a lethal phenotype suggesting that Tyr1P has evolved essential functions in higher eukaryotes. It is associated with antisense promoter and enhancer transcription and Pol II stability. Pol II and CTD modifications are involved in the transcription cycle and coordination of RNA processing complexes. A co-immunoprecipitation experiment in human cells indicated that Tyr1P co-immunoprecipitated with Ser5P and Ser7P but not Ser2P or Thr4P, pointing towards an association of Tyr1P with early transcribing isoforms of human Pol II. Tyr1P presents a specific pattern of phosphorylation along genes compared to Pol II.
Scientists from the French National Centre for Scientific Research have provided the first ever sub-cellular imaging and quantification of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), a key compound in the production of sulphur dioxide, which in turn enhances cloud formation and sunlight scattering, reducing global warming. Marine microorganisms including phytoplankton and bacteria play a crucial role in the ocean's sulphur cycle that produces DMSP. Despite DMSP’s key role, its biochemistry remained a mystery. By applying stable sulphur isotope tracers and using secondary-ion mass spectrometry, the researchers were able to follow the exchange of sulphur between Symbiondinium cells and two different bacterial strains.

DYT1 is a movement disorder caused by mutations in torsinA, but how these mutations cause dystonia remains unclear. Mouse models have failed to replicate the dystonia seen in patients, possibly due to differential developmental compensation between rodents and humans. This study used acute knockdown of torsinA in select brain regions of adult mice and found that knockdown in the cerebellum, but not in the basal ganglia, induced dystonia. Abnormal motor symptoms were associated with irregular cerebellar output caused by changes in the intrinsic activity of both Purkinje cells and neurons of the deep cerebellar nuclei. This study identifies the cerebellum as the main site of dysfunction in DYT1 and offers new therapeutic targets.
Researchers have proposed that humans are capable of generating their own feedback signals by monitoring internal decision variables, and have investigated this hypothesis in a visual perceptual learning task using fMRI and confidence reports. They found that mesolimbic brain areas encoded both anticipation and prediction error of confidence in a similar way to previous findings for external reward-based feedback, and that the model accounts for choice and confidence reports. These results suggest that learning can occur without external feedback by augmenting reinforcement models with confidence-based feedback.
H-NS is a nucleoid-associated protein present in Escherichia coli that forms nucleoprotein filaments on DNA, inhibiting transcription of horizontally transferred DNA and suppressing pervasive non-coding and anti-sense transcription. H-NS also plays a key role in Rho-dependent termination in enterobacteria; however, whether H-NS filaments pose direct barriers to transcript elongation and the underlying mechanisms are unknown. In this study, researchers used in vitro transcription and direct visualization of H-NS filaments and elongating RNAP by atomic force microscopy to investigate the effect of H-NS on transcript elongation. They found that H-NS filaments directly inhibit elongating RNAP and promote Rho-dependent termination only when H-NS forms bridging interactions. Meanwhile, H-NS-constrained changes in DNA supercoiling driven by transcription promote pausing at backtracking-susceptible sites.
A recent study investigated the effect of native α-Synuclein on synaptic vesicle fusion in Parkinson's and other neurodegenerative diseases. This involved the use of a single vesicle-optical microscopy system and found that native α-Synuclein causes clustering of synaptic vesicles, providing a "buffer" without affecting neurotransmitter release itself. The clustering effect is dependent on specific binding to synaptobrevin-2 and anionic lipids. The study found that α-Synuclein does not significantly affect the kinetics of Ca2+-triggered synaptic protein-mediated fusion, but instead induces clustering of vesicles with reconstituted synaptobrevin-2 or with both reconstituted synaptobrevin-2 and synaptotagmin-1.
Researchers have identified a new potential cell type for targeting during cardiovascular disease following the discovery in mice that cells resembling vascular pericytes embedded within basement membranes are intermediate progenitors for smooth muscle in the developing heart. Using confocal imaging, researchers determined when and where SM-MHC+ coronary artery smooth muscle cells differentiate within the context of the whole heart at single-cell resolution, identifying cells resembling vascular pericytes as the intermediate progenitor for the smooth muscles in development. Researchers propose that these pericytes differentiate into smooth muscle at arterial-remodelling zones in response to Notch signaling, and their identification raises the possibility that the Notch3 pathway could be manipulated in these cells to participate in coronary artery regeneration.
The article discusses the role of IL7RhiCcr6+ lymphocytes in the immune surveillance of lymph nodes for pathogen entry, and their ability to rapidly produce IL17 upon bacterial and fungal challenge. These innate-like lymphocytes are mostly LN resident and their proximity to the subcapsular sinus (SCS) is mediated by Ccr6. Migration into the SCS involves S1pr1, while movement from the sinus into the parenchyma involves the integrin LFA1 and its ligand ICAM1. CD169, a sialic acid-binding lectin, helps retain the cells within the sinus, preventing their loss in lymph flow. The article also discusses the existence of barrier immunity within LNs, as well as the high percentage of IL7RhiCcr6+ cells that are resident in the LN and not extensively recirculating under homeostatic conditions.
Ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) is a cellular mechanism that identifies ribosomal complexes halted due to defects in mRNA or nascent chain. Regulatory ribosomal ubiquitylation (RRub) helps facilitate the degradation of misfolded or damaged proteins during RQC. Recent research has shown that RRub events are reversible by deubiquitylating enzymes (Dubs). Furthermore, individual RRub events, such as eS10 and uS10 ubiquitylation, are dependent on other events like uS3 or eS10 ubiquitylation, suggesting a hierarchical relationship. This research may help identify potential targets for future therapies for neurodegenerative disorders related to protein aggregation.
Chloroplasts, which play important roles in the functions of photosynthetic eukaryotes, communicate with the nuclear gene expression system through a chloroplast unfolded protein response (cpUPR) in response to proteotoxic stress. The mechanism by which chloroplast proteotoxic stress is monitored and how the signal is transmitted from the organelle to the nucleus has remained largely unknown. However, a previously uncharacterized cytoplasmic protein kinase gene, termed Mars1, has been identified as the first known component in cpUPR signal transmission, which orchestrates the cpUPR transcriptional program. Activation of cpUPR through Mars1 mitigates photooxidative stress and delays photobleaching, and loss of Mars1 activity sensitizes cells to higher than normal light intensity (high light ‘HL’) and other chloroplast stressors. Selective impairment of protein homeostasis in chloroplasts triggers the cpUPR, a conserved organelle quality control pathway, which is activated after inactivation of the Clp protease, or exposure to HL. The exact mechanism by which the cpUPR pathway confers photoprotection remains to be deciphered. Nonetheless, engineering plants with constitutive cpUPR activation may be a promising strategy to enhance their tolerance to environmental stresses.
Scientists have discovered the neural mechanism behind self-generated muscle twitches during active sleep in neonatal rats. The mechanism involves distinguishing between self- and other-generated movements by monitoring discrepancies between planned and performed actions. Corollary discharges are conveyed to sensory areas and gate expected reafference. The study identified the external cuneate nucleus (ECN) as a site of movement-dependent sensory gating during wake, explaining how twitches trigger abundant reafferent activation of sensorimotor circuits in the developing brain. This is the first demonstration of a neural comparator that is differentially engaged depending on the kind of movement produced. The results of this study could lead to a better understanding of how infants learn motor skills during sleep.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease. Researchers have sequenced 28 SLE risk loci for SLE in a population of SLE patients and controls to provide a comprehensive assessment of genomic diversity at SLE risk loci in the EA population. The results reveal a new functional diversification mediated by HLA-D polymorphisms and provide important insights into the molecular mechanisms by which HLA-D and other SLE risk loci potentiate disease. Multiple variants in 26 of the 28 risk loci were strongly associated with susceptibility to SLE, with seven loci reaching genome-wide significance (p≤5 × 10-8), ten reaching suggestive significance (p≤5 × 10-5), and nine reaching confirmatory significance (p≤10-3). 1206 functionally annotated variants were in tight LD (D’>0.8) with the 21 peak risk signals, and all but 7 of these were non-coding, regulatory variants. These results demonstrate that multiple functional variations are in tight LD with the peak disease associated signal in every risk locus.
Researchers have discovered the mechanism by which certain enzymes, known as chromatin remodelers, move along DNA molecules to reorganize chromatin. Using a remodeler ATPase motor, the study showed how the motor can shift segments of DNA by changing the twist and length of nucleosomal DNA at SHL2, leading to nucleosome sliding by the CHD, ISWI, and SWI/SNF-type remodelers. The study was conducted on the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Chd1 remodeler and used variant nucleosomes to demonstrate how Chd1 remodelers decrease DNA twist at SHL2 in nucleotide-free and ADP-bound states and increase twist with transition-state analogs. The authors propose that formation and elimination of twist defects underlie the mechanism of nucleosome sliding by chromatin remodelers.
A computational model of fission-yeast mitosis was developed to understand the mechanisms involved in aligning and segregating chromosomes during spindle assembly. The model revealed the importance of progressive restriction of attachment geometry, destabilization of misaligned attachments, and attachment force dependence for robust chromosome biorientation. The spindle force generators were found to be kinesin-5 motors and crosslinkers in early mitosis, while interkinetochore stretch became important after biorientation. The same mechanisms that contribute to persistent biorientation lead to segregation of chromosomes to the poles after anaphase onset. The model provides insight into key requirements for robust chromosome biorientation, spindle length regulation, and force generation in the spindle.
The APOE4 allele, which has been linked to increased cardiovascular and neurological disease risk in post-industrial settings, may confer benefits in environments with higher pathogenic diversity and low cardiovascular risk by reducing innate inflammation when uninfected and maintaining higher lipid levels that buffer costs of immune activation during infection. A study of Tsimane forager-farmers in Bolivia found that APOE4 carriers had 30% lower C-reactive protein and higher total cholesterol and oxidized LDL, suggesting that the relationship between APOE4 and lipids may be beneficial for pathogen-driven immune responses and unlikely to increase cardiovascular risk in an active subsistence population. APOE3 is the most prevalent variant and arose ~200K years ago from a single nucleotide polymorphism at locus 19q13 from the ancestral APOE4, which is maintained at frequencies up to 40% in some central African populations. The APOE4 variant may persist due to the fitness benefits of lipid buffering in early life relative to APOE3, outweighing any harmful health effects that manifest in a post-reproductive life stage. The study also found that APOE4 carriers had higher BMI, total cholesterol, and oxidized LDL, yet lower levels of innate immune blood biomarkers. The association between APOE4 and inflammatory diseases in post-industrialized contexts may be due to an environmental mismatch. In pathogenically diverse environments, where there may be persistent pathogen-driven immune activation, the ability to maintain peripheral cholesterol levels would presumably be a benefit throughout life. The Tsimane have high rates of infection and upregulated immune function, minimal atherosclerosis, and are primarily reliant on foods acquired through horticulture, fishing, hunting, gathering, and small animal domestication. The study evaluated the immunophenotypes and lipid profiles of individuals with APOE3/3 and APOE4+ genotypes living in a pathogenically diverse, energy-limited environment, and found that APOE4 carriers maintain stable lipid levels under energetic restriction. Finally, the study assessed whether APOE genotypes differentially moderate associations between cholesterol and BMI for lean and high BMI individuals.
Researchers have identified the molecular basis for the uptake of a key protein in the African trypanosome, the parasites which causes sleeping sickness. The haptoglobin-haemoglobin protein receptor (HpHbR) of the trypanosome allows uptake of haem and provides an uptake route for trypanolytic factor-1. By analysing the structure of this receptor and its binding site in complex with human haptoglobin-haemoglobin, the researchers have revealed how the receptor binds to the protein complex and selectively takes it up in its entirety, which is necessary for parasite survival. They have also discovered the adaptation of the receptors and trypanosomes, which allows efficient ligand uptake despite the presence of an outside coating of variant surface glycoprotein, which acts as a barrier. The identification of this molecular uptake mechanism could lead to the development of new treatments in the future.
Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is necessary for cilia and flagella elongation and maintenance. The mechanism of IFT complex remodeling at the ciliary base and tip is not observable using conventional microscopy due to the presence of multiple trains coexisting in the turnaround zones. Researchers developed the one-dimensional PhotoGate assay to track single fluorescent complexes at the flagellar tip and observed the dynamics of IFT27, a core component of the IFT complex B. Results suggest that IFT complexes from different anterograde trains recombine with each other to form retrograde trains at the tip. The dissociation of kinesin-II from IFT trains serves as a negative feedback mechanism that facilitates flagellar length control in Chlamydomonas.
A theory that neurodevelopmental disorders arise from imbalances in excitatory and inhibitory brain circuitry may not be sufficient to capture the complexity of neural circuit alterations present in brain disorders. A multidimensional model would be better suited to capture the computational functions of neural circuits. Acting as a reverse-engineering approach to tackle brain disorders, the most promising level of investigation would be of neural circuits, as the gap between circuits and behavior is smaller than the gap between molecules and behavior. Despite several studies finding evidence that the imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory signaling is indeed upset in multiple brain disorders, a unidimensional model may limit its applicability due to the varying alterations in different neural firing rates and correlations. Computations and further data analysis conclude that an excitatory and inhibitory imbalance model may not be flexible enough to capture key aspects of the relationship between neural circuit components and function. Instead, a two-dimensional model that captures more features of the circuit function may provide better results. The ultimate result shows that a one-dimensional E/I balance rule that exclusively sought to normalize neural firing rates would leave neural correlations free to achieve arbitrary values.
A recent study has indicated that childhood immunization and vitamin A supplements may protect against malaria infection. The study examined national survey data from four sub-Saharan African countries and found that Bacille Calmette Guerin-vaccinated children were more likely to have the Plasmodium falciparum HRP-2-related antigenemia, and children receiving vitamin A supplements were less likely to present with parasitemia and antigenemia. Further studies with a focus on climate seasonality, placental malaria and HIV are needed. Malaria is a major public health challenge and many cases arise in regions with high universal immunization coverage. However, the impact of standard vaccination and vitamin A supplementation on malaria infection is unclear.
This document discusses the impact of universal chickenpox vaccination on the incidence of herpes zoster, which is caused by reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) that causes chickenpox. The document presents an individual-based model that integrates within-host data on VZV and between-host transmission data to simulate herpes zoster incidence. The model allows estimating pivotal biomedical parameters, including the duration of exogenous boosting, the VZV weekly reactivation probability and VZV subclinical reactivation having no effect on VZV-specific cellular mediated immunity. The model shows that reducing opportunities for varicella re-exposure through universal chickenpox vaccination could lead to an increase in herpes zoster incidence. The predictions of the model are highly uncertain due to the entanglement of exogenous boosting, waning of immunity, immunosenescence and reactivation, making it difficult to estimate the magnitude and duration of exogenous boosting accurately. One of the main points of criticism on current predictions by deterministic VZV simulation models is the entanglement of exogenous boosting, waning of immunity, immunosenescence and reactivation.
The study explores how spinal motor axons entering the limb are guided to their targets by molecular cues. The study finds that Netrin-1 attracts and repels distinct motor axon populations, according to their expression of Netrin receptors, and it synergistically integrates both attractive or repulsive Netrin-1 signals together with repulsive ephrin signals. The study investigates the mechanism of ephrin-B2 and Netrin-1 integration and finds that the Netrin receptor Unc5c and the ephrin receptor EphB2 can form a complex in a ligand-dependent manner. The study concludes that axonal growth cones are guided to their targets by molecular cues laid down at discrete decision steps along their routes, and that how multiple pathways interact and compound the limited molecular diversity of axon guidance cues to produce the rich complexity of nerve trajectories is unclear.
The study examines the locomotion behavior of C. elegans and how neural control affects their movements. The study presents two different modes of locomotion, regular undulations and flexible turning, and shows how graded reciprocal regulation of both modes allows the animal to adjust its locomotion strategy along a spectrum ranging from local sampling to long-distance traveling. The study shows how the interneurons AVK and DVA utilize neuropeptides to control both motor modes and are required for spatial navigation during chemotaxis. The study further indicates that the sudden decline in O2 levels evokes a change in the locomotion strategy from predominantly forward crawling to a mixture of reduced crawling and increased reorientations. This interpretation is in accordance with previous literature classifying similar behavioral strategy changes in the context of removal from food. The study provides insights into how neuromodulatory circuit elements control elementary motor components to flexibly adjust the strategy of locomotion.
Autophagy is a process where cytoplasmic material is enclosed and later degraded by the lysosomal system. Selectivity of this process is possible through the interaction of cargo receptors with Atg8-family proteins on the isolation membrane. Atg8-family proteins are conjugated to the headgroup of the membrane lipid phosphatidylethanolamine through Atg12~Atg5-Atg16 complex, which acts as an E3-like enzyme. However, it was unclear how the presence of an autophagic cargo is coupled to Atg8 conjugation. The study showed that the yeast Atg19 and Atg34, and human p62, Optineurin and NDP52 cargo receptors interact with the Atg12~Atg5-Atg16 complex through Atg8-interacting motifs (AIMs), and recruit Atg12~Atg5-Atg16 to the cargo. The directionality of this interaction
Cnidarians, including the hydrozoan Hydractinia echinata, are capable of remarkable regeneration but the underlying mechanisms have not been fully understood. In a new study, a team of researchers have found that, following decapitation, stem cell proliferation occurs resulting in a blastema, necessary for regeneration, forming at the oral pole within 24 hours. The cellular source responsible for blastema formation has been identified as the migration of stem cells from a remote area. Surprisingly, no blastema developed at the aboral pole after stolon removal. The research has resulted in crucial insights for regenerative biology.
The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) kinase GCN2 is activated by amino acid starvation to elicit a physiological program known as the Integrated Stress Response (ISR). Until now, a role for uncharged tRNAs was supported experimentally. However, mouse GCN2 activation has recently been observed in circumstances associated with ribosome stalling with no global increase in uncharged tRNAs. A mammalian CHO cell-based CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis screen was conducted to search for genes that contribute to ISR activation by amino acid starvation. Disruption of genes encoding components of the ribosome P-stalk, uL10 and P1, selectively attenuated GCN2-mediated ISR activation by amino acid starvation or interference with tRNA charging without affecting the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein stress-induced ISR, mediated by the related eIF2α kinase PERK. These observations support a model whereby lack of a cognate charged tRNA exposes a latent capacity of the ribosome P-stalk to activate GCN2 in cells and help explain the emerging link between ribosome stalling and ISR activation.
Salamander ganglion cells display an increase in sensitivity to a broader range of stimuli when peripheral motion is introduced. The increase in sensitivity coincides with an expected increase in information in bipolar cells after a global image shift, indicating that global motion switches the neural code from one that conserves energy to one that transmits greater information and encodes both weak and strong stimuli. This principle of adaptation allows for better performance in varying sensory input conditions by adjusting the neural code to the expected statistics of the sensory input.
The article discusses how species can adapt to changing environments through migration, adaptation, and phenotypic plasticity. Restoration projects that incorporate predicted future climates into seed sourcing decisions can build resilient populations for endangered species such as the Eucalyptus melliodora in Australia. Genomic and phenotypic variation can be examined to make empirical-based recommendations for seed sourcing. The article presents results from examining 275 E. melliodora individuals from 36 sites across their distribution range. The study found low levels of genetic structure over a large spatial scale. The study also used generalized dissimilarity modelling to test for geographic and environmental correlations and found a positive non-linear relationship between environmental distance and genomic distance. The article concludes that applying scientific knowledge to seed sourcing decisions during landscape restoration can help populations become better adapted to future environmental conditions.
Researchers have developed a new approach for understanding how the six proteasomal ATPases coordinate to achieve substrate translocation in the 26S proteasome, an ATP-dependent protein degradation machine. By constructing a physical model based on the nucleotide-dependent free-energy landscape (FEL) of the ATPase complex, the researchers were able to simulate the dynamics of the proteasome and quantitatively evaluate their predicted structural and kinetic properties. The FEL model predictions were found to be consistent with a wide range of experimental observations and suggested novel mechanistic features of the proteasomal ATPases. The cooperative movements of the ATPase subunits were found to result from the design of the ATPase hexamer entailing a unique free-energy minimum for each nucleotide-binding status. ATP hydrolysis dictates the direction of substrate translocation by triggering an energy-dissipating conformational transition of the ATPase complex. This work introduces a new method for studying the dynamics of the proteasome and provides a coherent explanation for a variety of structural and kinetic observations.
The dorsal raphe nucleus is the main source of central serotonin and plays a crucial role in regulating emotional behavior. The firing of serotonin dorsal raphe neurons is driven by α1-adrenergic receptors activation, but the ion channels responsible for this activation were previously unknown. The study found that these ion channels are mediated by the glutamate receptor homolog cation channel, delta glutamate receptor 1 (GluD1), which is constitutively active and responsible for inducing persistent pacemaker-type firing of dorsal raphe neurons. Loss of GluD1R-channels causes an anxiogenic phenotype, indicating their role in regulating dorsal raphe-related behavior. These channels may play a widespread role in the nervous system in regulating excitability. Current pharmacotherapies for mental health disorders, such as anxiety and depression, target serotonin receptors or serotonin clearance. GluD1R-channels may present a new target for treating these disorders.
Scientists at the University of California, San Diego have come up with a new way of visualising the Golgi apparatus inside cells. The Golgi is responsible for packing proteins and lipids into vesicles, shipping them around the cell, and bringing them to the right location. Scientists have been studying the Golgi for 50 years, but have never been able to agree on how it works. However, lately, some believe that the cisternae that form the Golgi stack, instead of being static, are mobile and move intact in the anterograde direction (cis to trans), which occurs by forming at the cis face and being consumed at the trans face. The authors of the new study have now created a staple made up of membrane-anchored repeats of the trans-aggregating FM domain that face the lumen of the secretory pathway. In the presence of the disaggregating drug, these proteins transit the secretory pathway. When the drug is removed these proteins form electron-dense plaques which are called staples. The researchers found that these membrane staples behave in such a way that reinforces the mobile model of transporting proteins through the Golgi.
Planar cell polarity (PCP) is crucial to the functioning of epithelial cells, and is key to organ development. Scientists have studied the proteins that transport signaling proteins in the PCP, and found that a protein called Arfrp1 is integral in moving one type of critical signaling protein called Vangl2 from the Golgi complex to the cell's surface. The research also argues that Arfrp1 works by exposing the binding site on auxiliary protein 1 (AP-1) that takes Vangl2 to the proximal surface of the cell. However, transport of another signaling protein used in PCP, Frizzled 6, remained unchanged when cells with Arfrp1 were examined. The study reveals the significance of Arfrp1 in the function of epithelial cells and the development of organs.
miR-142, a specific microRNA expressed in hematopoietic cells, is critical for the maturation and function of megakaryocytes, a type of blood cell responsible for the formation of blood clots. Researchers used a loss-of-function mouse allele to study the effects of miR-142 deficiency and found that it resulted in impaired megakaryocyte maturation and abnormal proplatelet formation, leading to thrombocytopenia (a low platelet count). The study also revealed that miR-142 orchestrates cytoskeletal dynamics, ensuring proper execution of actin-dependent proplatelet formation. The results suggest that miR-142 plays a pivotal role in megakaryocyte function and in maintaining normal hemostasis.
The Nef protein of HIV-1 is responsible for downregulating the cell surface co-receptor CD4 by hijacking the clathrin adaptor complex AP-2. A crystal structure of Nef bound to the AP-2α and σ2 subunits revealed how the AP-2 complex is hijacked by Nef, and identified the residues required for Nef to bind with AP-2 and downregulate CD4. The central loop of Nef is required for interaction with AP-2α and σ2, and also serves as a scaffold to position the loop. This study may aid in uncovering additional targets for inhibiting the pathogenic effects of HIV-1.
The increased expression of Down Syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule (Dscam) is implicated in the development of brain disorders such as Down Syndrome and fragile X syndrome. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of Abelson kinase (Abl) can ameliorate cellular defects caused by dysregulated Dscam levels, according to new research. Dscam levels are elevated in the brains of patients with DS and in mouse models of DS, and studies suggest a relationship between fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) and Dscam. Pharmacological methods of targeting Dscam or its signalling mechanism do not yet exist. Abl is implicated as a potential key molecule in mediating the function of Dscam in presynaptic terminal growth.
The proper development of vascular plants is dependent on the synthesis and distribution of the hormone auxin, which is regulated by a system of transporters including PIN proteins. This study shows that PIN-mediated auxin transport is directly activated by D6 PROTEIN KINASE (D6PK) and PINOID/WAG kinases. The study also suggests that the activation of PIN-mediated auxin efflux by protein kinases is a crucial component of auxin transport control that must be taken into account to understand auxin distribution within the plant. The study also found that D6PKs have an essential role in auxin transport regulation in inflorescence stems, and that both D6PK and PIN1 localize to the basal plasma membrane in cells where auxin levels are high.
Mitochondrial disease is a fatal pathology caused by deficits in energy production, and affects high energy-requiring tissues such as muscle and brain. Leigh Syndrome is the most frequent pediatric mitochondrial disorder, characterized by restricted anatomical and cellular specificity, affecting the central nervous system and leading to motor and respiratory deficits, seizures, and premature death. Mutations affecting the NDUFS4 subunit of mitochondrial Complex I are commonly associated with early-onset Leigh Syndrome. To understand the genetic identity of the neuronal populations and circuitries involved in the disease, a mouse model was used. The study showed that Ndufs4 inactivation in Vglut2-expressing glutamatergic neurons led to decreased neuronal firing, brainstem inflammation, motor and respiratory deficits, and early death. In contrast, Ndufs4 deletion in GABAergic neurons led to basal ganglia inflammation without motor or respiratory involvement, but was accompanied by hypothermia and severe epileptic seizures preceding death. These results provide novel insight into the cell type-specific contribution to the pathology of mitochondrial disease and its underlying cellular mechanisms.
Sexual reproduction in the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans, which is believed to benefit pathogenicity through the production of meiospores, involves spatiotemporal coordination of meiosis and basidial maturation. This study identified the two RNA-binding proteins, Csa1 and Csa2, as crucial components that bridge meiosis and basidial maturation, and proposed that their regulatory coordination serves as a determinant underlying the production of infectious meiospores in C. neoformans. The study developed a quantitative phenotypic method to evaluate basidial maturation and identified Fad1 as an important target of the Pum1, a protein important for meiosis regulation, which displays highly dynamic subcellular localization patterns during basidial maturation.
Toothed whales use echolocation to hunt prey and have a clicking rate of up to 500/s during prey pursuits. However, if echoes are processed on a click-by-click basis, neural responses 100x faster than vision are required to keep up with this information flow. The study shows that toothed whales adjust clicking rates to track prey within 50-200ms of prey escape responses and hypothesizes that these adjustments are elicited by sudden prey accelerations. The study also suggests a common neural underpinning for echolocation and tracking responses in vision. Response speed is critical for interactions between mobile prey and pursuit predators, with the fastest-responding individuals being the most likely to survive and reproduce. Echolocating toothed whales make stereotyped biosonar adjustments when prey attempts to escape during close approaches, but the apparent latency of these echo-kinetic responses is much longer than the inter-click intervals (ICIs) in buzzes.
Microtubules are microscopic protein filaments that switch between growth and shrinkage. The stabilising GTP (or GDP-Pi) cap at the growing microtubule end is believed to be essential during the microtubule growth phase. The precise size and nature of this cap are currently unknown, as they are difficult to visualise in individual dynamic microtubules. However, a study investigated the stabilising cap and found that it is formed by the binding regions of certain protein species, specifically EB proteins. Longer caps are more stable, but instability is triggered by the presence of a short region at the end of the cap. The study established the spatial and kinetic characteristics of the protective cap and provides insight into how its loss leads to the switch from microtubule growth to shrinkage.
The document describes the creation of a library of around 1000 Drosophila stocks using a CRISPR technology to insert gene constructs in introns, allowing expression of GAL4 under control of endogenous promoters. The library allows for numerous applications, such as mutagenizing genes and reporting tissue and cell-type specificity of gene expression. The authors developed a T2A-GAL4 technology using a CRISPR-mediated integration cassette (CRIMIC) to create a large library of gene insertions, and they show the potential applications of this technology for genetic and neurobiological studies. The library comprises a powerful resource for assessing gene function and provides a tool to survey subcellular distribution of encoded proteins.
A study using genome and transcriptome surveys of all free-living flatworm orders has provided resolution of platyhelminth interrelationships. The study used hundreds of nuclear protein-coding genes to explore phylogenetic signal through concatenation as well as recently developed consensus approaches. These analyses robustly support a modern hypothesis of flatworm phylogeny, emphasizing the importance of the often-overlooked ‘microturbellarian’ groups in understanding the major evolutionary transitions within Platyhelminthes. The study also proposes a novel scenario for the interrelationships between free-living and vertebrate-parasitic flatworms. The paper provides a consistent signal of deep platyhelminth interrelationships, demonstrating groupings familiar from the eras of classical morphological systematics and rRNA phylogenetics, as well as several novel but nonetheless well-supported clades.
A study conducted using LSD and ketanserin on healthy human participants found that LSD reduced associative brain connectivity while increasing sensory-somatomotor brain-wide and thalamic connectivity, and that ketanserin fully blocked the subjective and neural LSD effects. Whole-brain spatial patterns of LSD effects matched 5-HT2A receptor cortical gene expression in humans, indicating that the 5-HT2A receptor plays a critical role in LSD’s neuropharmacology. The study used a data-driven global brain connectivity method to quantify resting-state functional connectivity and compared it to cortical gene expression maps. The study was funded by several organizations and aimed to map time-dependent pharmacological effects of LSD on neural functional connectivity in healthy human adults and compare them to the spatial expression profile of genes coding for receptors interacting with LSD. 
Researchers have used a combination of bi-cistronic reporter gene vectors and silica-coated gold nanorods (GNRs) to accurately track the movement and fate of invasive cells after they have been transplanted or injected. The study characterised the use of the two tools in tracking injected murine MSCs over time in mice. The results showed that using both nanoparticle-based tracking and genetic reporter tracking enabled the non-invasive monitoring of the initial cell distribution on a sub-organ level as well as detecting tumour formation from very early stages. The team believes that the approach could be widely applied for cancer and regenerative medicine research.
Researchers have discovered that the ribonucleoprotein complex known as dyskerin (DKC1) is an unexpected transcriptional coactivator for pluripotency gene expression in embryonic stem (ES) cells. The complex appears to regulate the expression of key pluripotency genes critical to self-renewal in ES cells by occupying enhancers. This study also found that depletion of DKC1 in fibroblasts significantly decreased the efficiency of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell generation. The authors suggest that this transcriptional role for DKC1 in stem cell maintenance and somatic cell reprogramming is a previously unrecognized function of non-coding small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs).
Inflammatory response is essential to limit the negative effects of inflammation and control infections. The complex regulatory mechanisms controlling gene expression are critical to this process. This study used ribosome profiling to identify hundreds of mRNAs that were differentially translated during the inflammatory response in mouse primary macrophages. The 3'UTRs of these mRNAs contained enriched binding motifs for RNA-binding proteins, suggesting widespread translational regulatory networks. One such protein, Zfp36, was identified as a translation repressor. The endogenous Zfp36 was found to directly interact with cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (Pabpc1), and this interaction was required for the translational repression of Zfp36’s target mRNAs in resolving inflammation. Malfunction of these regulatory circuits may lead to pathological inflammation, which is associated with several human diseases.
The BRAF proto-oncogene is typically associated with the benign growth of pigmented ‘moles’, however it is also the most common driver mutation in melanoma. It is believed that the reason nevi do not progress to melanoma is due to a cell-autonomous process of ‘oncogene-induced senescence’. However, an analysis of a mouse model of Braf-driven nevus formation found no evidence that nevus cells are senescent and that nevus growth arrest is more likely due to cell interactions that mediate size control in normal tissues, rather than any cell-autonomous, ‘oncogene-induced’ program of senescence. The study also found that gene expression in arrested nevus melanocytes fails to identify them as more senescent than other skin cells or normal melanocytes. The growth arrest is driven by feedback mechanisms similar to those involved in normal tissue homeostasis rather than oncogene stress. By better elucidating the normal physiology of melanocytes in their environment, it may be possible to better understand and treat melanoma.
The document discusses the lack of a quantitative theory for predicting how preventive measures and post-diagnostic interventions affect the risks of life-threatening cancer, and evaluates how continuous measures, such as lifestyle changes and traditional treatments, affect both neoplastic growth and the frequency of resistant clones. The study compares and contrasts preventive and post-diagnostic interventions and discusses important mitigating factors that should be considered in a comparative understanding of these interventions. The mathematical models used in the study play an important role in describing and analyzing the complex process of carcinogenesis. The study finds that preventive measures generally result in more positive therapeutic outcomes than post-diagnostic interventions, but this advantage is lowered should prevention initially fail to arrest tumor growth. Resistance to treatment is a major concern, and while post-diagnostic interventions generally have poorer outcomes, preventive measures may achieve continual gains with daily cell arrest up to 0.6%. The study discusses several scenarios and provides approximate conditions for tumor control both analytically and numerically using empirical parameter estimates.
A report discusses how the brain processes sound localization, and the competing theories that have been developed to explain the process. The report describes two theories: the labelled-line model and the hemispheric-difference model, and discusses their different predictions on sound lateralization from interaural time differences. The report describes the results of a behavioral experiment that found softer sounds were perceived closer to midline than louder sounds, favoring rate-coding models of human sound localization. The report concludes that both models have strengths and weaknesses, and further research is required to establish which model best describes human sound localization.
The study investigated the role of human telomerase biogenesis and trafficking pathways in maintaining telomeres, which are important for chromosome stability. The study found that in human cells, telomerase RNA (hTR) depends on H/ACA proteins for stability, but a minimized cellular hTR containing only binding sites for telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) can still assemble biologically active telomerase enzyme. The study also found that while Cajal body chaperone TCAB1 and the Cajal body scaffold protein Coilin can enhance telomere maintenance, they are not essential for hTR telomerase to maintain stable telomere length homeostasis. Overall, the study sheds light on the influences of nuclear trafficking on human telomerase biogenesis and action at telomeres, and expands our understanding of the mechanisms by which different telomerase subunit mutations can cause human disease.
Researchers have used species distribution modeling to map environmental suitability for the Zika virus, showing a large portion of tropical and sub-tropical regions globally have suitable environmental conditions, with over 2.17 billion people inhabiting these areas. Zika virus was found in Uganda in 1947 and spread across other parts of Oceania, with large outbreaks in Latin America from 2015, raising concerns about continued global spread, and it has been declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization. Aedes mosquitoes, which also act as vectors for dengue and chikungunya viruses throughout much of the tropical world, transmit the virus.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are often used as measures of cognitive function in both healthy and neuropsychiatric conditions. It has been widely believed that these ERPs are generated by local activity within the cerebral cortex. However, recent research shows that an attention-related ERP in the frontal cortex is highly correlated with subcortical inputs from the basal forebrain (BF), suggesting that such inputs play a significant role in the generation of cognitive ERPs. Rats trained to perform an auditory oddball task displayed the characteristics of an attention-related ERP in the frontal cortex that was correlated with BF neuronal activity in single trials. The local field potentials (LFPs) associated with this ERP were similarly linked with BF activity and consistently triggered by BF electrical stimulation. This work highlights the previously-underappreciated role of long-range subcortical inputs from the BF in the generation of cognitive ERPs.
The article discusses the evolutionary history of stony corals, and how they have adapted to thrive and build reef formations in shallow tropical seas. By analyzing genomic and transcriptomic data from twenty stony coral species and a selection of reference bilaterians, the researchers identified genes that encode the proteins responsible for the precipitation and aggregation of the aragonite skeleton on which the organisms live, and revealed a network of environmental sensors that coordinate responses of the host animals to temperature, light, and pH. They also identified stress-related pathways, including apoptotic pathways that allow the host animals to detoxify reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. The article also discusses the impact of foreign gene acquisition in coral evolution and its contribution towards coral specific traits.
Mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake is catalyzed by the mitochondrial calcium uniporter, a multi-subunit Ca2+-activated Ca2+ channel. A mitochondrial inner membrane protein called EMRE has been identified as an essential subunit for Ca2+ permeation, and recent research determined the transmembrane orientation of EMRE and revealed its dual functionality as an MCU-activating and MICU-retaining subunit, which ensures tight regulation of all transport-competent uniporters. Uniporter function is controlled by the balance of Ca2+ influx and efflux across the mitochondrial inner membrane and EMRE is a metazoa-specific protein that interacts with MCU to allow Ca2+ permeation through its TMH, and is essential for this function in humans (but not in certain protists). Deletion or substitution of the EMRE C-terminal polyaspartate tail resulted in loss of uniporter activity, and interaction with MCU was revealed to be mainly through EMRE's TMH. Studies were conducted using CRISPR/Cas9 to produce MCU-knockout (KO), EMRE-KO, or MCU/EMRE double KO HEK 293 cell lines. These experiments show the physiological importance of EMRE’s regulatory function and how it fits into the uniporter complex.
Missense mutations in the ATM kinase gene have been found in many cancers and are enriched around the kinase domain. They are a potent oncogenic event and biomarker for Topo-isomerase I inhibitor-based therapy. The use of kinase-dead ATM protein, but not loss of ATM protein, prevents replication-dependent removal of Topo-isomerase I-DNA adducts at the step of strand cleavage. This leads to severe genomic instability and hypersensitivity to Topo-isomerase I inhibitors. These findings have implications for cancer therapy as Topo1 inhibitors effectively and preferentially eliminate AtmKD/-, but not Atm-proficient or Atm-/- leukemia in animal models. The study identified 206/286 non-synonymous mutations in the kinase domain, of which 21 are likely to abolish kinase activity, and 27 affect highly conserved residues. 72% of ATM mutations in human cancer are missense mutations that are highly enriched in the kinase domain, both in the presence and absence of heterozygous deletion of 11q23 including ATM.
The structure of human epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), a critical regulator of salt, water, and blood volume in the body, has been determined using single-particle cryo-electron microscopy. ENaCs are activated by proteolysis of peptidyl tracts embedded in the extracellular domain, which releases inhibitory peptides. The structure reveals that ENaC is composed of a large extracellular domain and a narrow transmembrane domain, and assembles with a 1:1:1 stoichiometry of alpha:beta:gamma subunits arranged in a counter-clockwise manner. The shape of each subunit is reminiscent of a hand, with key gating domains of a ‘finger’ and a ‘thumb’. The structure provides the first view of the architecture of inhibition of ENaC.
Researchers have used electron cryo-tomography to study the macromolecular structures of bacterial flagellar motors in three species of Gammaproteobacteria. The study found a correlation between the motor's stator system and its structural elaboration, with motors using single stators having only core periplasmic rings, while dual stators had an elaborated P-ring, and those with Na+ or Na+/H+-driven stators had both P- and L-rings embellished. This evolution of structural elaboration may have enabled pathogenic bacteria to colonise higher-viscosity environments in animal hosts. The bacterial flagellum is a macromolecular machine that transforms the movement of ions across the cell membrane into a mechanical torque to move the bacterial cell through its environment.
A new study shows that electrical stimulation of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in rats can enhance short- and long-term memory function. The research supports the use of deep brain stimulation (DBS) as a potential non-pharmacological treatment for dementia-related disorders, as current treatments are limited in their effectiveness. The study also found that DBS increased neurogenesis-associated genes and hippocampal cell proliferation, and these memory behaviours were strongly correlated with hippocampal neurogenesis. These findings suggest that chronic vmPFC high-frequency stimulation could be used as an effective therapeutic target for dementia-related disorders.
A study has found that bacteria can adapt to antibiotic pressure by modulating an enzyme called Cfr, which alters antibiotic binding sites through modification of ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The study identified mechanisms that enhance antibiotic resistance by performing directed evolution of a cfr found in a clinical MRSA isolate under antibiotic selection. The obtained highly resistant Cfr variants show increased rRNA methylation, which is achieved by improved expression and stability of Cfr through transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. The study also determined the molecular basis for broad resistance to antibiotics, providing a rationale for how m8A2503 causes resistance to ribosome antibiotics. This information can be used to design new antibiotics that can overcome resistance mediated by Cfr.
Legionella pneumophila, a bacterium that causes Legionnaires’ disease, has been found to inhibit the growth of other Legionella species using a secreted inhibitor called homogentisic acid (HGA). However, L. pneumophila can also be inhibited by HGA produced by neighboring strains. Researchers identified lpg1681 as a gene that modulates L. pneumophila susceptibility to HGA, and found that L. pneumophila sensitivity to HGA is cell-intrinsic and not mediated by previously described Legionella quorum-sensing pathways. The HGA-melanin pathway, previously thought to be beneficial to Legionella growth, produces HGA, which is secreted and potentially used to inhibit the growth of low-density competitors.
The cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) are a major family of E3 ubiquitin ligases that form multi-subunit complexes and are involved in degradation by the 26S proteasome. There are at least 600 E3s in the mammalian proteome, and alterations of the expression levels in several E3s or their substrates have been clinically and biochemically linked to cancer and other diseases in humans. In this study, the authors investigate the role of the different chain-initiating and elongating enzymes implicated in human SCF function. They use single-reaction monitoring mass spectrometry to estimate physiological E2 and E3 concentrations in cells, quench flow-based rapid kinetics to analyze the contributions of different enzymes to in vitro reconstituted reactions, and genetic analysis to uncover functional redundancies between different SCF-associated factors. These results uncover three main principles. First, some substrates and/or substrate receptors appear selective for a particular ubiquitin-modifying enzyme, even when assayed at physiological concentrations, whereas others are more promiscuously ubiquitylated by different ubiquitin-modifying enzymes. Second, the rates of ubiquitylation can depend dramatically on enzyme concentrations. Finally, unlike in yeast, human SCF activity appears to be highly buffered, such that the loss of any single SCF-associated E2 or E3 is compensated for by redundant factors. Collectively these results illuminate how the SCF regulatory system has been diversified through evolution and how this diversification has been exploited to allow differential substrate ubiquitylation.
A novel regulator of lung cancer stem cells or tumor-initiating cells (TIC), called the calcium pathway transcription factor NFATc2, has been identified by researchers in Hong Kong. High expression of NFATc2 results in poor tumour differentiation, adverse recurrence-free and cancer-specific overall survival. The researchers identified NFATc2 response elements in the 3’ enhancer region of SOX2, and NFATc2/SOX2 coupling upregulates ALDH1A1 by binding to its 5’ enhancer, leading to oxidative stress induced by cancer drug treatment being attenuated and increased resistance to treatment. Targeting this pathway provides a novel approach for the long-term treatment of lung cancer.
Researchers have used a new microfluidic device to reveal that fission yeast does not age and that cellular ageing and replicative lifespan can be uncoupled in a eukaryotic cell. Fission yeast cells grow by linear extension and divide via medial fission. After cell division, the two sibling cells each inherit one pre-existing cell tip, with new growth immediately localised at the old-pole end of the cell. Previous studies into fission yeast ageing have been conflicting, but this new study has settled the issue, showing that cell death is stochastic and does not exhibit the classic hallmarks of cellular ageing. Using a quantitative model, the researchers were able to demonstrate that replicative lifespan can be extended without any ageing phenotypes, and that increased genome instability decreases the lifespan of the yeast. The research has implications for the proposed mechanism of lifespan extension.
The role of specific areas of the brain, such as the hippocampus, in memory retrieval is still debated in the scientific community. In a study using mice, researchers imaged brain activity during retrieval of recent, early remote and very remote fear memories to identify the specific role of different areas of the brain. The study found that while CA1 is recruited for all memory retrievals, CA3 is no longer recruited for very remote retrieval. Additionally, parahippocampal areas are maximally engaged during very remote retrieval, suggesting a shift from the trisynaptic loop to the temporoammonic pathway for retrieval. The study also investigated the contribution of different areas of the cortex to remote memory retrieval, but further research is needed.
A study of the Ciona notochord, a transient embryonic structure, has shown that actomyosin contractility and planar cell polarity (PCP) interact in post-mitotic Ciona notochord cells to self-assemble and reposition actomyosin rings, which play an essential role for cell elongation. It was found that a tug of war between contractility, which localizes cortical flows toward the equator and PCP, which tries to reposition them, is responsible for the formation and position of the actomyosin ring. A simple model was developed to dissect the relative contribution of contractility and PCP to the self-assembly and repositioning of cytoskeletal structures which could be applicable to other morphogenetic events. The study provides insights into how cell polarity contributes to the organization of the cytoskeleton, and vice versa.
Voltage-gated potassium channels regulate ionic flux across biological membranes, interconverting between open, closed and inactivated states. The precise molecular determinants that mediate the rate of inactivation as well as how these channels precisely time the entry into the slow inactivated state in the presence of a sustained voltage stimulus are still not fully understood. The Kv channel pore domain contains intermeshed aromatic side chains, an arrangement termed the "aromatic cuff," that has long been suggested to play a role in the stability of the pore and likely slow inactivation. The authors used synthetic amino acid analogs and concatenated channel subunits to establish two H-bonds near the extracellular surface of the channel that endow Kv channels with a mechanism to time the entry into slow inactivation. In the absence of steric perturbations, breaking of either interaction triggers slow inactivation by means of a local disruption in the selectivity filter, while severing the Tyr445-Thr439 H-bond is likely to communicate this conformational change to the adjacent subunits.
Cerebral malaria (CM) can be classified into two types based on the presence or absence of characteristic retinal features; retinopathy-positive or retinopathy-negative. While malaria parasites are considered central to the pathogenesis of retinopathy-positive CM, their contribution to retinopathy-negative CM is largely unknown. Hospitals in malaria-endemic areas often lack diagnostic facilities to identify non-malarial causes of coma, making it difficult to study the contribution of malaria infection to retinopathy-negative CM. However, a natural experiment involving genetically inherited traits suggests that malaria parasitemia does contribute to the pathogenesis of retinopathy-negative CM. Sickle cell trait and blood group O are both inherited traits that protect against malaria illness, and their presence or absence in individuals can be used to assess the contribution of malaria parasitemia to retinopathy-negative CM. It is plausible that these traits do not protect against malaria parasitemia incidence. However, if they do not impact malaria parasitemia incidence, they can be used to study the role of malaria parasites in the pathogenesis of Ret-CM.
The article describes how macrophages engulf Candida albicans hyphae, creating incomplete phagosomes that are stabilized by a cuff of F-actin. The phagosomes have a distinct lipid composition and contain endo-lysosomal proteins. The hyphae grow at a fast rate, making it difficult for macrophages to engulf them. Frustrated phagocytosis results in the formation of incomplete phagosomes, and the actin cuff formed around the phagosome contributes to the formation of a diffusion barrier that limits the growth of the hyphae. The article proposes that the ligation of β-glucan by the LLD causes outside-in activation of CR3, which results in the formation of actin cuffs that stabilize the phagosome.
Social insects, such as the ant Lasius neglectus, employ a multicomponent behavior called destructive disinfection to prevent the spread of fungal infections among their colonies. Ants target infected pupae during the pathogen’s non-contagious incubation period, using chemical 'sickness cues' emitted by the pupae. They remove the pupal cocoon, perforate its cuticle, and administer antimicrobial poison, preventing the pathogen's replication from the inside out. This destructive disinfection is comparable to how the immune system of a metazoan body targets and eliminates infected cells, and it protects the rest of the colony by halting the pathogen's lifecycle. Social immunity is characterized by a care-kill dichotomy, where colony members should be cared for when possible but sacrificed if necessary, both of which benefit the colony. Social insects colonies are often referred to as "superorganisms," and their emergence is considered a major evolutionary transition. Social immunity protects the colony from infectious diseases, which could otherwise spread easily due to the intimate social interactions between colony members.
Central African forests are experiencing a lack of regeneration of light-demanding trees which dominate the canopy due to a decline in human disturbance. Populations of these trees began aging around 1850 after major anthropogenic disturbances ceased, leading to a lack of suitable openings for regeneration from common logging operations, and deforestation only further degrading landscapes. An interdisciplinary approach analyzing paleoecological, archaeological, historical, and dendrological data reveals the long-term history of human activities that have impacted central African forests. The study also presents challenges to current silvicultural practices, as it assesses the impact of historical human activities on central African forests with implications for future management practices.
Plants rely on their vascular tissues, the xylem and phloem, to transport water and nutrients throughout the plant. The pressure flow hypothesis, first proposed in 1930, suggests that the movement of sugars through the phloem is driven by pressure differentials without additional energy input. However, concerns have been raised about whether sieve tubes in the phloem have sufficient conductivity to allow for this pressure flow. This study found that sieve tube conductivity and turgor increases dramatically over long distances in plants, supporting the pressure flow hypothesis. The researchers also developed new methods to measure key parameters needed to understand phloem transport, providing tools for further investigation of this important process in plant function.
Mutations in two transcription factor genes, OUROBOROS (ORO) and SAMSARA (SAM), in the brown alga Ectocarpus were found to convert the sporophyte generation into a gametophyte. These two proteins were shown to form heterodimers similar to those found in green lineage TALE HD TF life cycle regulators. The presence of TALE-HD-TF-based life cycle regulation systems in brown algae indicates that these systems have an extremely ancient origin and have been independently recruited to regulate sporophyte developmental programs in at least two different complex multicellular eukaryotic supergroups. ORO and SAM transcripts were most abundant in gametes, indicating a role in initiating sporophyte development following gamete fusion. Analysis of gene expression networks associated with the two generations of the Ectocarpus life cycle revealed that ORO and SAM are master regulators of the gametophyte-to-sporophyte transition. Additionally, ORO and SAM formed a stable heterodimer mediated by their homeodomains.
Researchers have developed a cell type-specific pharmacological approach to block NMDA receptors (NMDA-Rs) in a molecularly defined neuronal population with the cell-type-selectivity of genetic methods and the temporal control of pharmacology. NMDA-Rs are important for synaptic plasticity, which is involved in learning and drug addiction. To demonstrate the usefulness of this approach, they targeted the NMDA-R antagonist MK801 to dopamine neurons and found that NMDA-Rs in these neurons are necessary for cocaine-induced synaptic potentiation. The approach was achieved by synthesizing an inert masked MK801 derivative that could be unmasked inside cells by transgenically expressed porcine liver esterase (PLE). The research demonstrates that it is possible to selectively assess the importance of NMDA-R mediated synaptic plasticity in specific cell types, which has been challenging with existing tools.
Researchers have developed a new imaging procedure that can image the whole heart and its subcellular architecture using 3D micro-computed tomography and 3D scanning electron microscopy. The approach enables multiscale studies in models of congenital heart disease (CHD), which affects about 1% of newborn babies and remains the primary cause of non-infectious children mortality in the developed world. The technology enables mapping of structural and ultrastructural heart features and allows for the discovery of localized ultrastructural disruptions that increase the risk of heart failure in CHD. The technology could facilitate the development of effective strategies to combat heart failure in CHD.
Researchers conducted a genetic analysis of small RNA (sRNA) abundance in the flag leaf of an immortalized F2 (IMF2) population in rice. They identified 53, 613, 739 unique sRNAs and 165, 797 sRNA expression traits (s-traits). They found that most s-traits from the same genes or sRNA clusters were slightly positively correlated, and some sRNA biogenesis genes were located in distant-sQTL hotspots, suggesting their important roles in the regulation and biogenesis of sRNAs. The study revealed features of the genetic controls of sRNA abundance showing both commonality and distinction with their precursor transcripts. The study also revealed that the abundance of sRNAs is likely related to proteins constituting the machinery for sRNA biogenesis and functioning.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease with little effective treatment available, and a poor 5-year survival rate. Recent research has shown that PDAC and its preinvasive precursor, pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN), arise via reprogramming of mature acinar cells. The master regulator of acinar differentiation, PTF1A, is downregulated in both mouse and human PanINs, indicating a central role in suppressing PDAC initiation. Loss of PTF1A alone is sufficient to induce acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM), potentiate inflammation, and induce a KRAS-permissive, PDAC-like gene expression profile. PTF1A acts as a tumor suppressant and protects mature pancreatic cells from cancer initiation. Better understanding the process of PanIN-PDAC evolution within the physiologic context of key risk factors to find effective therapies is crucial.
A recent study on perceptual decision-making in primates considered whether decisions are made hierarchically, with subdecisions integrated into final choices, or directly between final choices. The authors argue that a flat model, which directly selects between final choices, is a better explanation for behavioral and neural data, and provides agreement with neural recordings showing this integration in localized neural populations. They also show that the flat model is in line with the role of experience in building integrated perceptual categories where sensory evidence is merged prior to decision. The study used a task where monkeys had to detect the correct option out of four possible responses based on the visual information provided. The model of decision-making used a non-absorbing decision threshold and replicated the proportion for each of the four possible response types as well as the impact of each sample in the stream and the psychometric curve for both primary and secondary decision branches. The study shows that a flat decision space, rather than a hierarchical one, is a better explanation for decision-making in primates.
A study has found that the repair of naturally occurring DNA mismatches can actually induce mutations in flanking DNA, with most mutations affecting TpC sequences. The study shows that certain types of APOBEC cytidine deaminases mediate the mutagenesis and that base excision repair and mismatch repair pathways are involved. The findings suggest an 'heretofore unsuspected source of genetic changes,' with important implications for the mutational mechanisms underlying aging, diseases and evolution.
The article discusses the use of Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) in optogenetics to control neural circuitry with high spatial and temporal resolution. However, little has been known about the response kinetics of optogenetic stimulation across neurological subtypes. Neurons can be driven into depolarization block, where they cease to fire action potentials, especially in interneuron populations. The article highlights the need to determine the photo-response properties of targeted neurons empirically when using ChR2, particularly in studies designed to elicit complex circuit responses in vivo where neuronal activity will not be recorded simultaneous to light stimulation. The duration of a light pulse beyond a certain point has been found to result in silencing rather than higher spike rates in neurons expressing ChR2.
The study reports that Trithorax (Trx) actively maintains the heterogeneity of neural stem cells in the developing Drosophila larval brain by regulating a type II neuroblast functional identity through maintaining chromatin in the buttonhead (btd) locus in an active state. This helps to generate diverse differentiated cells in the fly embryonic ventral nerve cord. Trx functions to epigenetically maintain Btd expression in type II neuroblasts, thereby maintaining neuroblast functional heterogeneity in the larval brain. The study suggests that trx mutant type II neuroblasts lose the competence to generate immature intermediate neural progenitors (INPs) and directly generate differentiated cells.
The development of metazoans is modified by evolutionary changes in gene regulatory networks (GRNs), but there is widespread variation in the requirement for regulatory inputs in a key regulatory network in C. elegans. The requirement for activation of the endoderm GRN by SKN-1 or MOM-2 is highly variable between natural C. elegans isolates and even between closely related isotypes, with multiple genetic regions underlying the variation. The relationship between the two inputs into endoderm development is variable even within a single species. The activation of the GRN network for a germ layer is subject to genetic plasticity within a species, reflecting influences distributed across many genetic components that affect both SKN-1 and Wnt pathways. There is also substantial evolutionary divergence in the evolution of the relationship between SKN-1 and Wnt signaling through POP-1 in the endoderm GRN in different species.
A recent study examined how changes in parameters of G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) neurotransmission affect visually-guided behavior in rodents. The study found that changes in the concentration of key regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins, which control GPCR activity, impacted the sensitivity, onset timing, and maximal amplitude of light-evoked responses in rod- and cone-driven ON-bipolar neurons (ON-BCs) in the retina. The study further showed that changes in RGS concentration differentially impacted visually-guided behavior mediated by rod and cone ON pathways, illustrating that neuronal circuit properties can be modulated by adjusting parameters of GPCR-based neurotransmission at individual synapses. The study provides insight into the molecular mechanisms that connect GPCR signaling to relevant physiological functions and behavior.
Neurons have dendritic and axonal arbors which exhibit self-avoidance, in which branches repel each other, and self/non-self discrimination, where processes of neurons interact with those of neighboring neurons without repelling them. The functions of these processes are not fully understood, but in this study, retinal starburst amacrine cells were used to study this issue. Self/non-self discrimination is mediated by the gamma-protocadherins (Pcdhgs), a family of recognition molecules. These processes are essential for a circuit that computes directional motion. The preferred direction of motion for the DSGC( direction-selective ganglion cell) is opposite the preferred direction of motion for the SAC dendrites that innervate it. Inhibitory synapses of SACs also sharpen the directional preference of SAC dendrites. Loss of self-avoidance or self/non-self discrimination would degrade the direction selectivity of DSGCs.
Researchers have developed a new gene therapy technique that has been shown in trials on animals to prevent blindness caused by a genetic mutation. The technique, which involves using a DNA-binding protein to silence genes, proved highly effective in targeting rhodopsin, a protein in the eye that, when mutated, causes retinitis pigmentosa. The protein used compromised the binding of the rhodopsin gene and repressed its activity. The technique effectively blocked only the targeted gene, avoiding disturbing the activity of non-targeted genes. The next stage of research will be to test the technique more rigorously on larger animal species before moving to human testing.
Scientists have mapped how different mutations in the surface protein of the influenza virus impact the neutralization of the virus by human sera. They found that the sera of some individuals selects single mutations that reduce viral neutralization by over an order of magnitude, but different viral mutations escape the sera of different individuals. This variation in viral escape mutations is attributed to the fine specificity of anti-influenza immunity present in human sera. The study highlights the role of individual-to-individual variation in shaping the evolution and susceptibility of the virus to disease.
Supramolecular organizing centres (SMOCs) are large oligomeric complexes of proteins assembled during infections and tissue injury, which serve as signal centres promoting inflammation. Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathways use SMOCs known as the MyDDosome, which induce NF-κB and AP-1 activation to drive transcriptional responses to infection. Assembly of MyDDosomes is linked to microbial stimuli and inflammation, but current models for TLR4 signaling lack experimental evidence. Researchers used single-molecule imaging of TLR4-MyDDosome signaling in living macrophages to study the assembly of MyDDosomes. They find that TLR4/MD2 activation leads only to the formation of TLR4/MD2 heterotetramers suggesting a stoichiometric mismatch between activated receptors and MyDDosomes. The strength of TLR4 signaling depends on the number, size and assembly speed of MyDDosomes formed. The data showed that activated TLR4 acts transiently to nucleate MyDDosome assembly, which is uncoupled from receptor activation. MyDDosomes form quickly during TLR4 stimulation, and LPS binding stabilizes the TLR4/MD2 heterodimer and prevents the formation of active tetramers. TLR4 activation occurs in two-steps and involves a structural change to facilitate close apposition of the C-termini of the TLR4 dimer to allow TIR dimerization followed by the recruitment of downstream signal transducers. The rates of nuclear translocation for NF-κB correlate with the magnitude of NF-κB translocation and the TNF α-mCherry reporter expression, suggesting that signal strength depends on the speed at which critical numbers of MyDDosomes form to trigger NF-κB translocation to the nucleus.
Adult neurogenesis in the rodent olfactory bulb is known to occur but its impact on olfactory processing is not fully understood. A recent study found that mice without young, adult-born neurons (ABNs) showed impaired fine discrimination ability in an olfactory discrimination task compared to normal mice. Using a genetic method to inducibly suppress adult neurogenesis, the researchers found that ABNs are essential for the enhancement of pattern separation in mitral cells, particularly during task engagement, potentially functioning as a mediator of feedback regulation to shape MC odor encoding. The study suggests that ABNs in the olfactory bulb are critical for fine odorant discrimination, particularly during active engagement.
This document explores the role of mechanical signals in determining cell identity, specifically focusing on the master regulator SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM) gene in Arabidopsis. The study found that STM expression is correlated to curvature in the boundary domain of the shoot apical meristem, which reflects the presence of mechanical stress. The study also demonstrated that STM expression in the boundary domain is required for organ separation. The study suggests that mechanical signals may play a role in defining cell identity during development, particularly in plants, which are slow and iterative systems that do not involve cell movements. The shoot apical meristem is a particularly fitting system to explore the contribution of mechanical signals in channeling growth and identity from intrinsically generated mechanical stresses. The document provides detailed methods and results of the study, along with images and figures.
The study investigates the intrinsic factors responsible for regulating the growth of cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) during embryonic heart development. The researchers found that the ancient cell-fate regulator Numb and its homologue Numblike are crucial for sustaining the number and fate of CPCs in the second pharyngeal arches (PA2s) and for normal heart development. Deletion of these genes resulted in a depletion of CPCs in PA2s and an atrophic heart. The study also showed that the PA2s serve as a microenvironment for the expansion of undifferentiated CPCs, which differentiate into cardiac cells as they exit the arch. Finally, by visualizing Mesp1 progeny, the researchers found that Numb and Numbl are required for the formation of the PA2 and OT/RV (outflow tract/right ventricle). Overall, the findings suggest that Numb and Numbl play an important role in the self-renewal and maintenance of CPCs during embryonic heart development.
The Drosophila genome has over 13,000 protein-coding genes, the majority of which remain poorly understood, partly due to lack of antibodies or reporter constructs to visualize them. A genome-wide library of 10,000 green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged clones, comprising tagged genes and most of their regulatory information, has been created along with transgenic lines for 880 tagged proteins. This resource enables systematic analysis of protein expression and localization in various cellular and developmental contexts, and allows interaction proteomics from developing pupae and adult flies. The pipeline for systematic transformation of the tagged fosmid constructs into flies has been established. The resource is helpful for the study of protein expression and localization patterns in various developmental and physiological settings.
The study explores the role of FoxP2 isoforms in vocal learning in young zebra finches. The researchers manipulated the FoxP2 isoforms in the song-specific region of the bird brain during a critical period for song development and examined the unique contributions of each isoform to vocal learning. They found that the confluence of learning and singing coexpression in juvenile Area X is fundamental to vocal learning. Overexpression of FoxP2 .10+ revealed its unique role in the acute modulation of vocal variability, while overexpression of FoxP2.FL impaired vocal mimicry of tutor songs. The study suggests that the ability to modulate between relatively low and high variability states is important for proper vocal learning.
The article describes a study on how fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) secreted from bone marrow stromal cells protects leukemia cells from tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and contributes to the development of resistance, disease persistence, and relapse. The study found that FGF2 is secreted in exosomes, which are endocytosed by leukemia cells. Expression of FGF2 and its receptor, FGFR1, are increased in stromal cells and primary AML stroma, and increased FGF2/FGFR1 signaling is associated with increased exosome secretion. Inhibition of FGFR can modulate stromal function, reduce exosome secretion, and may be a therapeutic option to overcome resistance to TKIs. The study also provides evidence that the interruption of FGF2-FGFR1 signaling affects subsequent protection of leukemia cells. The study was conducted using HS-5 stromal cells, and additional experiments were done using K562 and MOLM14, and FGFR inhibitor PD173074.
During cell division, molecular motors help remodel the microtubule cytoskeleton to form a bipolar assembly of microtubules called the spindle, which is essential for accurate chromosome segregation. Dynein is a minus-end-directed motor that slides parallel spindle microtubules to focus their minus-ends into spindle poles. Localizing dynein at minus-ends is predicted to cluster microtubules into poles, but how dynein becomes enriched at minus-ends is not known. This study shows that NuMA, a microtubule-binding protein, targets dynactin to minus-ends and localizes dynein activity to spindle minus-ends to cluster spindle microtubules into poles. NuMA may serve as a mitosis-specific minus-end cargo adaptor, recruiting dynein activity to minus-ends. Dynactin and NuMA have specific, steady-state binding at minus-ends and NuMA's localization to minus-ends is independent of minus-end binders γ-TuRC, CAMSAP1, and KANSL1/3. Both NuMA’s minus-end-binding and dynein-dynactin-binding modules are required for correct spindle architecture. These findings identify a mechanism for mitosis-specific recruitment of dynein to microtubule minus-ends and illustrate how spatial regulation of local forces may give rise to larger-scale cytoskeletal architectures.
Researchers combined zero-mode waveguides with fluorescence resonance energy transfer to observe binding at individual cyclic nucleotide-binding domains (CNBDs) from human pacemaker ion channels critical for heart and brain function. This allowed them to directly observe binding at a single-molecule level and revealed the dynamics of multiple distinct steps underlying cyclic nucleotide regulation. Their approach provides an invaluable tool for deconstructing the pathway by which binding is transduced to functional changes elsewhere such as at the pore gate.
The protein synaptotagmin-1 plays a critical role in facilitating the release of neurotransmitters during synaptic transmission. It binds to negatively charged membrane lipids, including phosphatidylserine and phosphoinositides, but the details of this process have not been fully understood. Scientists have now used a range of methods to investigate the binding mechanism of synaptotagmin-1 to these lipids. They found that synaptotagmin-1 binds to PtdIns(4,5)P2 via a polybasic lysine patch in the C2B domain, and this binding may promote the docking of synaptic vesicles. The presence of calcium neutralizes the negative charges of the Ca2+-binding sites and allows synaptotagmin-1 to penetrate the membrane through binding to PtdSer. The binding of PtdIns(4,5)P2 to the polybasic lysine patch increases the affinity of synaptotagmin-1 and prolongs its residence time at the plasma membrane, which is crucial for triggering exocytotic membrane fusion. The study also provides evidence that the binding of synaptotagmin-1 to PtdSer and PtdIns(4,5)P2 is distinct in nature.
The mTORC1 pathway, a protein kinase that couples nutrient availability to cell growth, has been identified as a critical regulator of red blood cell (RBC) growth and proliferation. The pathway regulates RBCs through iron levels in the diet, and activation or inhibition of the pathway results in macrocytic or microcytic anemia, respectively. The discovery identifies a link between nutrient signaling and cellular growth in mammals, and suggests mTORC1 activity coordinates the rate of translation with the availability of iron to regulate RBC growth.
The LEAFY transcription factor played a role in the evolution of land plants' determinate spore-bearing axes into indeterminate branching shoots with specialized reproductive axes that form flowers. However, mapping the LEAFY evolutionary trajectory has been difficult due to the lack of functional data from the intervening lineages. A new study reveals that the fern Ceratopteris richardii, a model for fern development, has a role for LEAFY in maintaining cell divisions in the apical stem cells of both haploid and diploid phases of the lifecycle. The study suggests that an ancestral LEAFY module that promotes cell proliferation was progressively co-opted, adapted, and specialized as novel shoot developmental contexts emerged. This knowledge enhances our mechanistic understanding of developmental innovations during land plant evolution.
Scientists have discovered a mechanism that preserves a younger transcriptome into an older age, which increases lifespan by counteracting the effects of aging. The scientists found that transcriptional drift, which occurs when aging causes genes within functional groups to change expression in opposing directions, causes a transcriptome-wide loss in mRNA stoichiometry and loss of co-expression patterns in aging animals compared to young adults. In Caenorhabditis elegans, the antidepressant mianserin was found to attenuate transcriptional drift, allowing for the preservation of a younger transcriptome into an older age. Mianserin treatment extended lifespan by exclusively slowing age-associated changes in young adults, thereby postponing the onset of mortality. The study questions the assumption that the effects of longevity mechanisms counteract the effects of aging continually throughout life.
The article discusses the use of high precision magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate the laminar specificity and functional roles of different frequency channels in human cortical networks. The study used a visually cued action selection task to induce low- and high-frequency activity in visual and sensorimotor cortices. The results showed that visual alpha activity predominantly occurred in deep cortical layers, while visual gamma activity occurred more superficially. Movement-related sensorimotor beta and gamma activity also showed lamina-specific pre-and post-movement changes, suggesting a more complex functional role than the proposed feedback and feedforward communication in sensory cortex. The study confirms the existence of distinct frequency channels operating in a lamina-specific manner across cortex, but their functional roles in sensory and motor processes are more complex than previously thought.
The androgen receptor (AR) is a master regulator essential for prostate development and cancer. However, its specific functions in prostate stem/progenitor cells have not been fully understood. The study investigated AR function in CARNs (Castration-Resistant Nkx3.1-expressing cells), a luminal stem/progenitor cell that functions in prostate regeneration. The study found that AR deletion did not affect the frequency or luminal properties of CARNs but altered their ability to serve as cells of origin for prostate cancer in a context-dependent manner. AR-deleted CARNs could serve as a cell of origin for focal neuroendocrine differentiation in a novel mouse model of AR-negative prostate cancer.
The article discusses the discovery of a network of dynamic, tubular lysosomes in Drosophila muscle through live imaging. The integrity of this network requires VCP, an AAA-ATPase that, when mutated, causes degenerative diseases of muscle, bone, and neurons in humans. The study finds that human VCP rescues defects caused by loss of Drosophila VCP and overexpression of disease-relevant VCP transgenes dismantles tubular lysosomes, linking tubular lysosome dysfunction to human VCP-related diseases. Disruption of tubular lysosomes is correlated with impaired autophagosome-lysosome fusion, increased cytoplasmic poly-ubiquitin aggregates, lipofuscin material, damaged mitochondria, and impaired muscle function. The article proposes that VCP sustains sarcoplasmic proteostasis by controlling the integrity of a dynamic tubular lysosomal network and suggests that lysosome tubular dysfunction contributes to VCP mutant pathogenesis. The study also finds that the lysosomal network structure and dynamics are consistent with the involvement of the microtubule cytoskeleton. Additionally, the article discusses the use of RNAi to screen for genes required for lysosome tubulation and identifies VCP as essential for the integrity of the entire tubular lysosome network.
The Bicoid (Bcd) protein in Drosophila embryos is known to distribute in a concentration gradient that organizes the anterior/posterior axis of the embryo. However, technical issues have limited the sensitivity of past studies of pre-syncytial blastoderm embryos and precluded studies of oocytes after stage 13. This study developed methods to analyze stage 14 oocytes and pre-syncytial blastoderm embryos and found that stage 14 oocytes make Bcd protein and that Bcd regulation of target gene expression is apparent at nuclear cycle 7, two cycles prior to syncytial blastoderm. The study also found that Kruppel (Kr) is expressed by pre-cellular, syncytial blastoderm embryos in a central band that spans approximately 20% embryo length, and that Kr expression depends on maternal Bcd. These findings show that the processes that generate the Bcd protein gradient are more complex and operate earlier than had been appreciated, and that the function of the Bcd gradient begins prior to formation of the syncytial blastoderm.
The process of myogenesis, or muscle formation, is a conserved process. However, it is not fully understood how each muscle's morphology is determined to allow for coordinated movement. Each muscle in a Drosophila larva has a distinct identity that reflects the expression of specific transcription factors. By deleting certain transcription regulatory modules, researchers were able to generate viable muscle identity mutants and study the physiological and mechanical properties of abnormal muscles. The study showed that muscle identity plays a role in muscle attachment and muscle/muscle matching, and branched muscles can affect locomotion behavior. The study also found that binding of certain transcription factors is required for proper muscle development, and sustained transcription in the founder cell nucleus can lead to partial reprogramming of other nuclei and the formation of branched muscles. The study also investigated how muscles attach to tendon cells and found that the precise matching of attachment sites is controlled by transcription factors, and deviations can lead to morphological changes and affect the overall muscle pattern.
The document discusses the investigation of collective feeding in the roundworm C. elegans, particularly at the intermediate scale, using quantitative phenotyping and agent-based modeling to identify behavioral rules underlying both aggregation and swarming. The study reveals that swarming is simply driven by local food depletion but otherwise employs the same behavioral mechanisms as the initial aggregation. The research demonstrates that the rules governing collective behavior at this intermediate scale resemble those at the micro or macro scale, some mixture of both, or require new principles. The study contributes to bridging the scale gap in understanding collective behavior.
The size of an animal's eyes influences the quality of its vision, but little is known about how this affects specific aspects of vision. Insects are good models for studying the effects of eye size on visual systems because many insect species exhibit size variation. Researchers have developed a novel method based on x-ray microtomography to measure the 3D structure of insect eyes and to calculate predictions of their visual capabilities. Using this method, the researchers investigated visual allometry in the bumblebee Bombus terrestris and found that size affects specific aspects of vision, including binocular overlap, optical sensitivity, and dorsofrontal visual resolution. They also identified key features in the allometry of the visual topology of bumblebees that may represent general rules for how compound eyes scale with size.
The article describes a simulation of how realistic whisker maps can self-organize via information exchange between adjacent cells under gene expression gradients. The study involves a model with a modified reaction-diffusion style model that extends from a 1D to 2D cortical sheet to simulate arealization. The simulation results in a clear Voronoi-like tessellation of topographically organized thalamocortical projections that allow for relative locations of fields to be specified by the interaction parameters, γ, implying a topological map in the cortex that could be specified by a spatial ordering of the γ values in the thalamus. Such patterning results from complementary thalamic and cortical guidance gradients. The model provides insights into barrel development and predicts that organization is topological but highly irregular, with a general expansion in the territory occupied by central versus peripheral domains, leading to the absence of identifiable barrel fields. The study also conducts a sensitivity analysis to determine the extent to which the quality of the pattern can be perturbed by different parameters.
Mitochondrial protein import is a vital function for the correct functioning of mitochondria and is regulated by the TIM23 complex. The two domain structure of Tim44 plays a central role in the coordinated processes of translocation and import coupled to the ATP-dependent action of an Hsp70-based import motor at the matrix face, which are mediated by membrane potential and involve the presence of presequences containing precursor proteins. The C-terminal domain of Tim44 interacts with the translocation channel and is in contact with translocating proteins while the N-terminal domain interacts with the components of the import motor. Recent findings show that both domains need to work together and be expressed in the same cell to rescue Tim44 function. Understanding the function of Tim44 may be useful in the treatment of human diseases where mitochondrial function is disrupted, such as neurodegenerative disorders, diabetes and cancer.
The article discusses the challenges in automating the detection of complex animal behaviors in neuroscience, with a particular focus on grooming behavior in mice. The authors developed a machine learning solution that can detect grooming behavior at a human-level performance across visually diverse mouse strains. They also identified the genetic architecture that regulates heritable variation in grooming behavior in the laboratory mouse. The article emphasizes the importance of automating behavior recognition in behavioral neuroscience and proposes a generalizable solution to complex action detection.
RasGRPs are guanine nucleotide exchange factors that activate Ras or Rap, and regulate cellular signaling. Mutation or aberrant expression of RasGRPs can cause disease. The charge of His 212 alters RasGRP1 signaling activity and its function as a pH sensor. The structure of autoinhibited RasGRP1 was compared to that of active RasGRP4:H-Ras and RasGRP2:Rap1b complexes, and His 212 was found to be critical for autoinhibition. SNVs of RasGRP1 were tested, and His 212 Tyr showed an altered regulation of RasGRP1. His 212 is conserved among vertebrate RasGRPs and is far from the Ras-binding site.
Researchers have discovered that the N-terminal domain of the cellular isoform of the prion protein (PrPC) serves as a powerful toxicity-transducing effector that is tightly regulated in cis by the globular C-terminal domain. Ligands binding to the N-terminal domain abolish spontaneous ionic currents associated with neurotoxic mutants of PrP, and antibodies targeting epitopes on the C-terminal domain induce currents and cause degeneration of dendrites on murine hippocampal neurons. The researchers speculate that disruption of the inter-domain regulatory interaction could contribute to pathology in neurodegenerative disorders and warn that the results have important implications for the safety of anti-PrP antibody therapies for prion and Alzheimer’s diseases.
The study investigates how prior preferences for certain options affect decision-making in the brain. Participants made choices between items from different categories and the study found that default options, based on prior preferences, were chosen more frequently and quickly. This preference was shown to be a result of a shift in the starting point of valuation processing in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), a brain region involved in valuation and decision-making. Overall, the study suggests that default biases in decision-making are influenced by prior preferences and can play a significant role in decision-making processes in the brain.
The human BET family of proteins are involved in gene transcription and are potential targets for cancer and immunoinflammatory disease therapies. The yeast Bdf1/2 proteins are homologues of BET proteins and were previously thought to only target a specific transcription factor; however, a recent study has found that Bdf1/2 also have important contributions to transcription initiation and elongation that extend beyond their role in the transcription factor. Depletion of Bdf1/2 resulted in a collapse of transcription, with changes more sensitive to Bdf1/2 depletion than to depletion of TFIID, a conserved transcription factor in yeast that regulates transcription of almost all polymerase II-transcribed genes. The Bdf1/2 proteins co-occupy the majority of yeast promoters and affect preinitiation complex formation and recruitment of TFIID, Mediator, and basal transcription factors to chromatin. The functionality of Bdf1/2 is similar to that of mammalian BET proteins, particularly Brd4, which is important for both transcription initiation and elongation. The results of the study suggest that BET function is widely conserved in eukaryotes.
Researchers have developed a new method called Flip-Flop that permits precise and efficient inactivation of genes based on spatial and temporal cues, across different developmental systems. The technique involves introducing a cassette that contains two modules: a protein-trap module and a gene-trap module, both nested within inverted pairs of canonical FRT and FRT14 sites. Thus, the module can be converted to a gene-trap module by inverting the cassette’s orientation with flippase enzymes, such as FLP, creating a mosaic tissue consisting of cells that no longer express the protein and can be recognised by red MCherry labelling in contrast to those that continue to express the protein and retain a green EGFP-tagged protein. The new method, which is efficient and reliable, is flippase-dependent, allowing it to be used in both developing and adult flies with unprecedented detail.
The article discusses how meristems, groups of stem cells in plants, are regulated by a feedback loop between the CLAVATA (CLV) and WUSCHEL (WUS) signaling pathways. The CLV pathway involves the CLV3 peptide being secreted and perceived by LRR receptors, including CLV1 and CLV2, to signal the restriction of WUS expression. The study focuses on understanding how signaling specificity is achieved, particularly by CLV2, which is involved in signaling by various peptides in addition to CLV3. The study identified FASCIATED EAR2 (FEA2) as a receptor involved in transmitting signals from different CLE peptides through different downstream effectors, the alpha subunit of the maize heterotrimeric G protein CT2, and ZmCRN. The study involves testing the model by driving the expression of the ZmFCP1 peptide to investigate the roles of FEA2 and FEA3 in signaling. It was found that ZmCRN functions in the same pathway as FEA2 and is associated with natural variation in kernel row number. The study also discusses the epistatic relationship between FEA2 and ZmCRN and how they function either in the same or in different pathways.
Researchers have found that seasonal selection on body size can influence population dynamics in fruit flies, causing predictable multigenerational density cycles. Opposing seasonal episodes of natural selection on body size interacted with both direct and delayed density dependence to cause population cycles. Such life-history trade-offs could have important consequences for population dynamics, particularly when selection on body size is density-dependent. The study also investigated how a seasonal fitness trade-off related to body-size could affect changes in population size and body size over time using replicate populations of Drosophila melanogaster exposed to repeated changes in food resources. In addition to these experiments, the researchers developed a mathematical model to investigate the contributions of both viability selection and delayed density dependence to population dynamics. The experiments and model predictions suggest that life history trade-offs caused by seasonal variation in resources can create periodic fluctuations in population and body size.
Choice hysteresis, the tendency for animals and humans to repeat recent choices, has been linked to residual activity in competitive attractor networks within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). Using an established model of decision-making, researchers found that decaying activity from the previous trial caused choice hysteresis, which could be controlled through simulated depolarizing or hyperpolarizing network stimulation. They then used transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on human participants to modulate choice hysteresis, finding that net soma depolarizing currents increased hysteresis, while hyperpolarizing currents suppressed it. These findings highlight the role of residual activity in biasing perceptual decisions and provide a potential non-invasive way to alter choice biases through tDCS.
Potassium channels are activated by ligands and/or membrane potential, but the gating mechanism differs among different types of channels. In some, the intracellular gate is the activation gate and the selectivity filter is the inactivation gate. In others, the selectivity filter may be the main gate. This study focuses on the KcsA channel, which was believed to be activated by simply opening the intracellular gate, but the authors found that ligand-induced conformational changes in KcsA changed the selectivity filter from closed to conductive during channel activation, suggesting the selectivity filter is the main gate in KcsA. The study used molecular dynamics simulations and electrophysiology measurements to investigate ion permeation through the selectivity filter and found that ion permeation is impeded by a closed selectivity filter conformation, while a dramatic increase in K ion conductance occurs within the selectivity filter after the channel has switched from a conformation with a closed intracellular gate to one where it is open, with the wider diameter allowing for a knock-on transition state or a vacancy-diffusion pathway. The widening of the selectivity filter is associated with movement of the pore helix, particularly the lower part, and the side chain of leucine at the bottom of the pore helix is important.
This article discusses the use of co-transcriptomic analysis to study the interaction between a plant host (Arabidopsis) and a fungal pathogen (Botrytis cinerea) to understand how they manipulate each other for their own fitness in a pathosystem. The study utilized a collection of 96 isolates of B. cinerea, infection on Arabidopsis wild-type and two mutants with compromised immunity and identified ten B. cinerea gene co-expression networks that encode known or novel virulence mechanisms. The co-transcriptome data identified potential mechanisms underlying host-pathogen interactions and shed light on the potential targets for fungal pathogen phytotoxins and prevailing counter-responses from plants. Additionally, the study found that the plant defense phytohormone network shapes the immune responses of the plant host while also shaping the virulence gene expression within the fungal pathogen. The article highlights the need for advancements in in-planta analysis of dual-species interactions.
Harbour porpoises can broaden their biosonar beam during the terminal phase of an attack on prey, similar to some bats, and maintain this ability to change beam width within this phase. This flexibility is modulated by the melon and adjusted to accommodate the dynamic spatial relationships with the prey and the acoustic complexity of the surroundings. Whales and bats adaptively change their acoustic field of view (FOV), suggesting that beam width flexibility has been an important driver in the evolution of echolocation for prey tracking. Despite independent evolution and different methods of sound generation and transmission, both whales and bats decrease signal intensity and auditory sensitivity while increasing the signal emission rate as they close in on their prey. Toothed whales, like the harbour porpoise, have a directional sound beam that restricts their acoustic FOV, enabling longer detection range by increasing intensity along the acoustic axis and reducing ensonification of off-axis objects. However, whales and bats can maintain a narrow beam pattern, even at close target range, without losing too much resolution, so changing the beam width in the terminal phase is disadvantageous but necessary, which shows that beam width flexibility is important for echolocation in mammals.
Genomic instability and impaired genome maintenance are fundamental in the pathogenesis of human cancers. In prostate cancer, structural genomic rearrangements are a key mechanism driving tumorigenesis. Despite this, somatic alterations predisposing to chromosomal rearrangements in prostate cancer remain unclear. The most commonly mutated gene in primary prostate cancer is SPOP, which defines a distinct molecular class of prostate cancer. Recent research shows that SPOP mutation is an early event specifically associated with increased intrachromosomal genomic rearrangements. It has been found that SPOP modulates DNA double strand break repair and that its mutation is therefore associated with genomic instability, and indicates that mutant SPOP may increase response to DNA-damaging therapeutics. The study implicates SPOP as a novel participant in DSB repair and suggests that SPOP mutation drives prostate tumorigenesis in part through genomic instability.
The study examines the function of multiple enhancers that regulate key patterning genes in developing Drosophila embryos. The study found that the enhancers can exhibit additive, super-additive or sub-additive activities, and the level of enhancer activity determines the switch between additive and non-additive behaviors. The use of both primary and shadow enhancers improves the precision and reliability of gene expression. The study suggests that the molecular mechanisms responsible for the precision of gene control in development can be dissected using a combination of quantitative live imaging and modeling. The study also provides a preview into the complex function of multiple enhancers interacting with the same promoter.
Excitation-inhibition (E:I) imbalance has been theorized to play a role in autism, especially in males who are affected more than females. Sex-related mechanisms, such as X-linked genes and androgen hormones, can influence E:I balance and affect autism differently in males versus females. Through a combination of in-silico modeling and in-vivo chemogenetic manipulations in mice, the study shows that a time-series metric estimated from fMRI, the Hurst exponent (H), can be an index for underlying change in the synaptic E:I ratio. The results suggest that E:I imbalance affects autistic males and females differently and that increasingly intact medial prefrontal cortex H is associated with heightened ability to behaviorally camouflage social-communicative difficulties, but only in autistic females. However, further research is needed to understand how E:I imbalance may differentially affect autistic males and females.
The brain uses joint spiking patterns of noisy, unreliable neurons to carry information, but this noise limits the neural code's capacity and determines how information can be transmitted and read-out. To overcome this noise and identify which patterns are semantically similar, the brain must accurately decode. The neural code is organized into clusters of synonymous activity patterns that are similar in meaning but can differ in structure. The brain may use this structure to enable accurate decoding of novel stimuli from novel spiking patterns. Noise is prevalent in the nervous system and limits the neural code's capacity and content, determining how information is encoded and read-out. The structure and content of neural population codebooks can be quantified by measuring the similarity between population activity patterns. This is done by comparing what each pattern tells the brain about the stimuli using encoding noise models. Noise correlations are central in shaping the code's capacity and content, and the degree of network noise correlations increases during interesting events in a video.
Researchers studying the olfactory system in adult mice have found that sensory inputs potentiate the strength of sensory inputs up to several weeks after the end of training, thus concluding that experience-dependent plasticity can occur in the periphery of adult mouse olfactory system. This plasticity should improve odor detection and contribute towards accurate and fast odor discriminations. The researchers found that enhanced sensitivity and potentiation of sensory inputs was induced specifically through associative learning and not by a passive exposure to the same odorants.
A study claims that 8,000-year-old remains of cultivated wheat discovered on an archeological site in the UK may actually date back to more recent times. Reports suggest that contamination may have occurred, and test results with modern and ancient DNA suggest that the samples are not ancient. If confirmed, the presence of wheat on the Bouldnor Cliff could be discounted as the result of trading. However, one of the researchers that first discovered the remains has criticised the new study, suggesting the evidence of ancient wheat DNA is "overwhelming".

The interaction between membrane protein interfaces in lipid bilayers plays a crucial role in membrane protein folding. However, quantification of the strength of these interactions has been challenging. Studying dimerization of ClC-type transporters offers a new approach to the problem as individual subunits adopt a stable and functionally verifiable fold that constrains the system to two states - monomer or dimer. The free energy of ClC-ec1 dimerization in lipid bilayers has been measured using single molecule photobleaching analysis, revealing that it is one of the strongest membrane protein complexes measured so far, and introduces it as a new type of dimerization model to investigate the physical forces that drive membrane protein association in membranes.
Using a new bioinformatic method to analyze ribosome profiling data, researchers found that 40% of lncRNAs and pseudogene RNAs expressed in human cells are translated, with translated lncRNAs preferentially localizing in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, ~35% of mRNA coding genes are translated upstream of the primary protein-coding region (uORFs) and 4% are translated downstream (dORFs). The researchers developed a method, RibORF, to identify translated ORFs from ribosome profiling data and applied it to predict translated ORFs within lncRNAs, pseudogenes, and mRNAs. The predicted translation probabilities correlated well in two cancer models and identified thousands of translated ORFs.
Researchers have mapped the neurons comprising the mushroom body, an associative center in invertebrate brains, detailing their potential connections. They found that each of the 21 MB output neuron types elaborates segregated dendritic arbors along the parallel axons of approximately 2,000 Kenyon cells, forming 15 compartments that collectively tile the MB lobes. The axons of the KCs project to discrete neuropils outside the MB, and three MBON types form a feedforward network in the lobes. The study provides an anatomical substrate from which one can infer a functional logic of associative olfactory learning and memory, as well as insight into how meaning is imposed on unstructured neurons, and how valence can be translated in behavioral output. 

The FeatureREDUCE framework has been developed for the accurate quantitative determination of intrinsic DNA binding preferences of transcription factors (TFs). TFs play a crucial role in regulating gene expression, and understanding their biological function is essential. In vitro technologies have been developed to provide such information, but computational algorithms for analyzing the data generated have not yet fully matured. FeatureREDUCE presents a flexible framework for building sequence-to-affinity models from protein binding microarray (PBM) data. It can account for multiple modes of binding, dependencies between nucleotides within the binding interface, and positional and orientational biases. The algorithm uses robust regression and modeling of technology-specific biases to infer specificity models of unprecedented accuracy and precision.
Researchers have discovered that neurons in the lateral amygdala (LA) are critical for the acquisition and expression of fear memories, and that the neurotransmitter dopamine has a role in the formation of such memories. However, it was not known whether dopamine neurons help in the discrimination between predictive and non-predictive fear stimuli. The researchers discovered that the plasticity underlying differential fear coding in the LA is regulated by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) signalling in dopamine neurons, and alterations in this plasticity are associated with non-discriminative cued-fear responses. Loss of NMDARs in dopamine neurons leads to deficits in developing cued fear discrimination and altered fear coding in the LA.

The article discusses the association between numerical values and space. Previous research has attributed this association to cultural influences, but recent evidence suggests pre-linguistic and biologically-determined factors may play a role. The study focuses on 3-day-old chicks and their response to different numerical values presented on either the left or right side. It found that numerical magnitude, rather than individual lateral bias, explained the chicks' choices. This supports the idea that the spatial numerical association may originate from pre-linguistic precursors.
The paper discusses the use of single-cell RNA sequencing to study Toxoplasma gondii, a protozoan parasite that undergoes a complex and poorly understood developmental process critical for establishing a chronic infection in its hosts. The study reveals hidden states and transcriptional factors associated with each developmental stage and a highly heterogeneous, sporadic expression pattern of SAG1-related sequence (SRS) antigens. The researchers also identified AP2IX-1 as a transcription factor that controls the switching of surface antigens. In addition, a comparison between Toxoplasma and Plasmodium scRNA-seq results reveals conserved transcriptional programs between the asexual life cycles of both organisms. The study provides the first comprehensive single-cell atlas of Toxoplasma in the course of asexual development and helps reveal that the antigenic repertoire of this parasite is much more heterogeneous than previously believed.
A study has shown that the regulatory subunit p85α of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) can have a p110α-independent role in positively regulating PTEN stability and activity by homodimerizing to selectively bind unphosphorylated activated PTEN. As a result, homodimeric but not monomeric p85α is able to protect PTEN from degradation and enhance its lipid phosphatase activity and membrane association, suppressing the PI3K pathway. Mutations have been identified in cancers that target the homodimerization or PTEN interaction surface, disrupting the equilibrium of p85α monomer-dimers and leading to disease development.
Researchers have performed the first in vitro study of the bacterial Min protein system, which is considered to be one of the most prominent examples of intracellular pattern formation in biology. By using fully confined three-dimensional chambers coated in lipid bilayer and isolated through pressure valves, the researchers identify three typical Min protein dynamical behaviours dependent on chamber parameters. These behaviours include pole-to-pole oscillations, spiral rotations and travelling waves. The researchers suggest that their results could lead to a better understanding of pattern formation in reaction-diffusion systems, and could be used to model intracellular Min gradients in bacterial cell division.
This study examines venom production dynamics in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis in different developmental stages, using a combination of transcriptomic, biochemical, and transgenic tools. The study finds that venom composition and the types of toxin-producing cells change greatly between developmental stages, which can be explained by the different interspecific interactions of each life stage. The study also suggests that the venom landscape in animals with complex life cycles is wider and more dynamic than previously thought. The study offers Nematostella as a unique system for studying venom production dynamics in animals with complex life cycles.
Researchers have identified hundreds of new genes that are targets of the tumour suppressor p53, using a new genome-wide analysis technique called Global Run-On sequencing (GRO-seq). The p53 protein is a transcription factor that activates a range of other genes in response to potentially oncogenic stimuli. When p53 is activated by the molecule Nutlin-3, it activates around 200 genes, most of which have not been previously established as direct targets. Compared to previous microarray profiling techniques, the researchers found that many target genes were missed, as microarray profiling requires significant delays to see significant changes in gene expression. The results of this study are expected to enable a better understanding of p53's function, which is limited despite the importance of the protein in cancer biology.
Researchers have created a comprehensive map of the inputs that control the function of the striatum in mice. The striatum receives excitatory inputs from the cortex and the thalamus, and controls sensorimotor, associative and limbic functions. The study reveals that there are clear boundaries between the three known striatal domains, and also suggests the existence of a fourth functional subdivision in the most posterior striatum. The findings suggest that the dorsomedial striatum serves as an information hub due to its highly heterogeneous, multimodal inputs. Optogenetic experiments also revealed that striatal inputs originating from different cortical or thalamic subregions form synapses in the striatum with distinct plasticity properties. The research will guide functional studies aimed at investigating diverse striatal functions.
The enterococcal cytolysin is a virulence factor that kills human immune cells and is produced by many clinical isolates of Enterococcus faecalis. The cytolysin is made up of two peptides that are modified by the enzyme CylM. The process involves the dehydration of Ser and Thr residues and the addition of Cys residues to create thioether crosslinks. The structure of CylM has been determined, revealing that the dehydratase domain has structural similarity to eukaryotic lipid kinases. The cyclization domain contains a β-sheet region composed of three antiparallel strands, which may be responsible for binding the leader region of the substrate peptide. The N-terminal dehydration domain is related to the catalytic core of lipid kinases. The importance of the β-stranded element in the cyclase domain for the dehydration reaction has been investigated and found not to be required. This information may help in the development of inhibitors of cytolysin biosynthesis, which could be therapeutically valuable.
A population of mouse spinal interneurons, known as dI3 interneurons, are necessary for motor system plasticity following spinal cord transection. While dI3 interneurons are not essential for normal locomotor function, they are needed for stable recovery of locomotor activity after spinal cord transection. Removing dI3 interneurons from spinal microcircuits by eliminating their synaptic transmission left locomotion more or less unchanged, but abolished functional recovery, indicating that dI3 interneurons are a necessary cellular substrate for motor system plasticity following transection. It is suggested that dI3 interneurons compare inputs from locomotor circuits with sensory afferent inputs to compute sensory prediction errors that modify locomotor circuits to effect motor recovery.
Researchers have identified two subpopulations of stromal cells that exist in mesenchymal tissue (the part of fat tissue that supports fat structure). The "fibro-inflammatory progenitors" lack the ability to produce fat and have anti-adipogenic effects on healthy white adipose tissue. Conversely, the "adipocyte precursor cells" have a strong adipogenic capacity and give rise to fat cells in vivo. The researchers discovered that the fibrogenic and inflammatory phenotype of the fibro-inflammatory progenitors is regulated by nuclear receptors, providing insight into potential cell-cell interactions impacting adipogenesis and inflammation in obesity. Improved isolation strategies for these subpopulations will facilitate further study into WAT remodeling and mechanisms leading to metabolic dysfunction.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a non-invasive method that can be used to enhance and impair cognitive abilities. However, very little is known about its effects on the cellular and subcellular levels. In this study, the effect of TMS on dendritic activity in layer 5 pyramidal neurons of the somatosensory cortex was examined using an optical fiber imaging approach. It was found that TMS causes GABAB-mediated inhibition of sensory-evoked dendritic Ca2+ activity, activating fibers within the upper cortical layers that leads to the activation of dendrite-targeting inhibitory neurons which in turn suppresses dendritic Ca2+ activity. The study concludes that TMS holds promise as a non-invasive method to investigate brain structures and provides insight into the cellular mechanisms underlying TMS-evoked inhibition. The study also highlights dendrites as potential targets for therapeutic approaches.
Blood vessels play an essential role in tissue repair, development and tumour growth, with most blood vessel networks generated through angiogenesis. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key regulator of this process and currently both VEGF and its receptors, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and Neuropilin1 (NRP1), are targeted in therapeutic strategies for vascular disease and cancer. This study investigates the role of NRP1 in VEGF-mediated angiogenesis and aims to generate a mouse line that selectively disrupts VEGF binding to NRP1. The study concludes that the Nrp1D320K mutation selectively eliminated VEGF binding and maintained SEMA3A binding in vitro, confirming that this mutation eliminated VEGF-NRP1 binding in vivo. Furthermore, the study showed that NRP1-deficient vessels have reduced V
Iron-sulfur clusters are vital for several cellular processes, including respiratory metabolism, DNA repair, and ribosome assembly. Genes NFU1 and BOLA3 have been linked to defects in these processes. In yeast, Nfu1 and the mitochondrial BolA proteins, Bol1 and Bol3, facilitate the transfer of Fe-S clusters to client proteins and prevent oxidative damage. Deficiencies in Fe-S assembly in mitochondria and lipoic acid-dependent 2-oxoacid dehydrogenases can lead to Multiple Mitochondria Dysfunctions Syndrome (MMDS), leading to lactic acidosis, encephalopathy, and infant death. Yeast cells lacking Nfu1 exhibit a growth defect on synthetic complete medium with acetate, while defects in succinate dehydrogenase and aconitase activities are observed in isolated mitochondria. The study proposed that Nfu1, in conjunction with Bol3, assists in the Fe-S transfer from the biosynthesis apparatus to the client proteins, protecting against oxidative damage. Ectopically expressing ISA1 and ISA2 in nfu1∆ cells rescues the attenuation of lipoic acid formation on PDH and KDH, and the enzymatic activity of SDH is restored.
Researchers have discovered that flies have an increased propensity to sleep following a meal. The study, published in eLife, reveals that the amount of sleep varies according to the amount consumed, with protein and salt positively correlated with postprandial sleep. The scientists discovered that silencing leucokinin receptor (Lkr) neurons specifically reduced sleep induced by protein consumption, while proposed that subsets of inhibitory gating networks contribute to the regulation of postprandial sleep. While there have been a number of humans studies into the phenomenon, little was previously known about how it operates, largely because there was no way of testing the effects of feeding on sleep. 

Schistosomes, which infect 200 million of the world's poorest people, are believed to maintain their longevity by renewing a lineage of tegumental cells that are associated with the host-parasite interface, according to new research. Somatic stem cells in Schistosoma mansoni were found to generate such cells, which are short-lived and turned over rapidly. The research has important implications for treating schistosomiasis, as it identifies the factors that allow the parasite to survive in the host vasculature for decades, and presents potential targets for treatment.

Researchers at the Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics have discovered a previously unknown process of tumour suppression involving the mutation of a single gene found in basal keratinocytes of zebrafish embryos. The gene, Atp1b1a, normally helps to prevent cancer by promoting cell adhesiveness and polarity, while also aiding in ion transportation across cell membranes. When the gene is compromised in both the surrounding periderm and in the heart and kidney, hypotonic stress occurs, leading to epidermal malignancy. However, PI3K and NF kappa B pathway activation, which promotes cell survival, is also activated. Those studying the process found that blockading this pathway and maintaining the isotonic nature of the environment prevented this malignant transformation. This indicates that hypertonicity may contribute to tumour development and that Atp1b1a has a novel tumour suppression mechanism. 

The diaphragm muscle is an essential part of mammalian breathing, separating the thoracic and abdominal cavities. However, little is known about the origin of the left-right (L/R) asymmetries in diaphragm morphology and contraction. The study investigated this and found that both the diaphragm muscle and phrenic nerves have asymmetries established independently of each other during early embryogenesis. It was also found that phrenic motoneurons receive an early L/R genetic imprint, with L/R differences both in slit/robo signaling and MMP2 activity, and this helps to match neural circuit formation to organ asymmetry. The Nodal pathway is essential for the establishment of diaphragm nerve asymmetry. Many diseases can affect diaphragm function and therefore cause morbidity and mortality.
This article discusses the differences in cell behaviour during morphogenesis between two fly species, Drosophila melanogaster and Chironomus riparius. The study focuses on the differences in the gastrulation process, which ranges from individual cell migration to the coordinated infolding of an epithelial sheet. The authors identify two genes, folded gastrulation and t48, that act as a switch in fly gastrulation from individual cell migration to invagination of the blastoderm epithelium. The study also explores whether these genetic differences provide an evolutionary advantage and the possible gains that have been made through the evolution of gastrulation modes.
A genetic study in Drosophila sheds new light on how Notch, a signalling pathway important for cell fate decisions, interacts with other genes to control cell proliferation which, if defective, can lead to hyperplasia and cancer. Through a genome-wide screen, the study uncovers a complex Notch-dependent genetic circuitry underpinning proliferation and hyperplasia, and identifies a novel synergistic relationship between Notch and non-receptor tyrosine kinases Src42A and Src64B to promote hyperplasia and cell cycle perturbation, by activating the JNK signalling pathway. Notably, the JNK pathway is responsible for the majority of the studied phenotypes and transcriptional changes downstream of Notch-Src synergy. These findings could help understand the mechanisms behind developmentally crucial processes and pathologically defective cellular growth.
A new scientific report describes an algal-fungal interaction where algal cells are internalized within the hyphae of the Mortierella elongata fungus. This symbiosis appears to be stable, with both partners remaining physiologically active over months of co-cultivation, leading to the eventual internalization of photosynthetic algal cells. This mutualism, observed through isotope tracer experiments, illustrates the mechanisms leading to endosymbiosis in fungal-algal mutualisms&nbsp;and provides valuable insights into the underlying principles that govern microbial mutualisms, with potential applications in biotechnology.
A study has found that mice with depleted levels of the Forkhead Box O1 (FoxO1) transcription factor exhibited increased vascular density in adipose tissue and improved glucose metabolism. Deficiency of FoxO1 increased endothelial proliferative and glycolytic capacities, potentially accounting for the improvements at the tissue level that affected whole-body glucose metabolism. The study findings revealed that endothelial metabolic and angiogenic adaptations are critical to whole-body energy homeostasis.

Researchers have studied how the human brain controls hand movements for various tasks, and proposed the concept of "synergy" to simplify the control of various hand postures by engaging sets of muscles and joints simultaneously. However, it was unclear if the synergistic hand postures were encoded at a cortical level. The researchers conducted an experiment combining kinematic, electromyography, and brain activity measures. The findings suggest that hand postural synergies are encoded in cortical areas involved in hand motor control, and are successfully discriminated between individual grasping movements. These findings support a novel cortical organization for hand movement control and have potential applications for brain-computer interfaces and neuroprostheses.
Researchers have discovered how a key protein mediates the signalling pathways important for neuronal death and survival. The study looked at the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) protein, which appears in several neurodegenerative diseases and promotes neuron damage in times of stress. The protein, which doesn't have an associated catalytic activity, regulates apoptosis and the RhoA and NF-kB cellular signalling pathways. The research team say that competitive protein-to-protein interactions control the hierarchical activation of downstream pathways in non-catalytic receptors. And they have now identified the functionally critical residues in the p75NTR death domain (DD), mutations of which weaken specific pathways. The study sheds light on how p75NTR works in the absence of ligands and defines the binding interface between the DD and RhoGDI.
Researchers from the University of Utah have discovered a gene that can alter the body’s ability to cope with sleep deprivation. In experiments on mice, the researchers were able to increase the amount of time mice spent awake by blocking a particular gene called Sik3. The team believes that the discovery could offer a new approach to treating conditions associated with sleep deprivation, such as Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia, while also helping shift workers, doctors and soldiers who often work for extended periods of time without rest.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the roles of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcripts in regulating gene transcription and chromatin organization. The authors focused on the Dali lncRNA, which is expressed in the central nervous system downstream of the Pou3f3 gene. The authors found that Dali regulates transcription of the Pou3f3 locus locally, and also targets active promoters to regulate expression of neural differentiation genes, in part through association with the POU3F3 protein. The authors also found that Dali interacts with the DNMT1 DNA methyltransferase, and regulates DNA methylation status of CpG island-associated promoters in trans. This study provides evidence that a single lncRNA can control the activity and methylation of genomically distant regulatory elements to modulate large-scale transcriptional programs.
Researchers have identified RNA binding motif protein 47 (RBM47) as a suppressor of breast cancer progression and metastasis, whose inactivity can enable the emergence of a pro-metastatic state. The study combined gene expression data from clinical breast cancer and cell line models, as well as mutation data from cancer genome resequencing programmes, and also revealed how RBM47, an RNA-binding protein, modulates mRNA splicing and stability. The researchers suggest that the low-frequency driver mutations that were identified as well as epigenetic alterations that enable the stabilisation of changed transcriptomic profiles can cause or reinforce cancer states, making them plausible therapeutic targets. 
Aneuploidy, the gain or loss of whole chromosomes, is a hallmark of cancer, aging, and birth defects. However, normal tissues can recognize and eliminate aneuploid cells through a process called cell competition, which eliminates cells based on differences from neighboring cells rather than their intrinsic properties. Ribosomal protein (Rp) genes, which are essential for individual cells and are spread throughout the genome, are also used as a potential marker for aneuploidy. A recent study in Drosophila found that segmentally aneuploid cells with differing Rp gene doses were eliminated through the RpS12-Xrp1 cell competition pathway, while cells with normal Rp gene doses were able to differentiate into adult tissues. This suggests that cell competition triggered by differences in Rp gene dose between cells is a significant mechanism for the elimination of aneuploid somatic cells and could play a role in preventing cancer.
The function of the nervous system requires intracellular transport of various cargo throughout complex neuronal morphologies. The leading conceptual model of neuron-wide transport is called the ‘sushi-belt model’. This paper formalized the sushi-belt model mathematically and showed that it can achieve complex spatial distributions of cargo in reconstructed morphologies. However, the model also predicts a tradeoff between speed, precision, and metabolic efficiency of cargo transport, which may explain the prevalence of local biosynthesis in neurons. The paper examines how well trafficking can perform given what is known about active transport and the typical morphologies of neurites. Intracellular trafficking is being characterized in increasing detail; microscopic cargo movements are stochastic, bidirectional, and inhomogeneous along neurites. The paper confirms that the sushi-belt model can produce any spatial distribution of cargo in complex morphologies. However, the model also predicts that global trafficking from the soma is severely limited by tradeoffs between the speed, efficiency, robustness, and accuracy of cargo delivery.
Researchers have discovered the importance of the apical extracellular matrix (aECM) in preventing mechanical deformation of the embryonic epidermis during the embryonic morphogenesis of Caenorhabditis elegans. In their study, they demonstrated how the embryonic sheath network was critical in ensuring epithelial tissues remain appropriately resistant to deformation by a variety of intrinsic and extrinsic mechanical forces that arise during the normal course of development. Additionally, they discuss how an improper force balance can lead to morphological abnormalities and birth defects.
Disassembly of the synaptonemal complex (SC) is essential for successful meiotic chromosome segregation. The signaling mechanisms regulating this disassembly are not fully understood. This study shows that the mammalian Rho GEF homolog, ECT-2, regulates SC disassembly in C. elegans by functioning through the RAS/ERK MAP kinase signaling pathway. SYP-2, a SC central region component, is a target for MPK-1-mediated phosphorylation and this process impairs the disassembly of SC proteins from chromosomal domains referred to as long arms of the bivalents. Inactivation of MAP kinase is important for timely disassembly of the SC proteins from the long arms and relies on ZHP-3/RNF212/Zip3 and COSA-1/CNTD1 pro-crossover factors coordination. This research provides insight to the regulation of SC proteins and successful chromosome segregation.
The folding of eukaryotic chromosomes during mitosis in order to fit them into manageable units for the mitotic spindle remains only partially understood. This work examines how phosphorylation at serine 10 of histone H3 (H3 S10) and deacetylation of histone H4 contribute to the process of chromosome condensation. The study closely analyses chromatin compaction using a fluorescence-based assay to measure changes in the intensity of TetO/TetR-mCherry at the TRP1 locus on chromosome IV in yeast cells. Mutations in the H3 S10 pathway were found to affect fluctuations in chromatin condensation over the cell cycle. It was also established that unique mitotic processes account for the axial contraction of chromosome arms and short-range chromatin compaction. The combined action of these processes causes defects in chromosome segregation and cell viability upon inactivation. Furthermore, both pathways rely at least partially on the deacetylase Hst2 protein, suggesting that this protein helps coordinate chromatin compaction and axial contraction to properly shape mitotic chromosomes.
Researchers have identified the mechanism that regulates tooth root patterning and development in mice. The study found that the enzyme Ezh2, which is part of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), plays a key role in determining the number of roots a tooth has. Ezh2 is primarily expressed in the dental mesenchyme, and an antagonistic interaction with the epigenetic regulator Arid1a controls patterning by regulating Cdkn2a expression. The study provides insight into the regulation of organogenesis and has implications for tooth regeneration. Loss of functional roots reduces bone support to the tooth and adversely affects the function of the dentition. The findings may also shed light on human evolution, as different patterns of tooth root morphology have been observed in different hominins.
Researchers have investigated the genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation and chromatin accessibility in mouse rods and cones to understand their molecular differences. Loss of NR2E3 in rods shifts their epigenomes to a more cone-like state, indicating its importance in maintaining their identity. The study also identifies differences in DNA methylation between retinal photoreceptors and brain neurons, and a substantial fraction of DNA hypo-methylated regions in adult rods that are not in active chromatin. This work defines the epigenomic landscapes of rods and cones, revealing features relevant to photoreceptor development and function.
This study examines how the immune system affects tissue regeneration using the African spiny mouse as a model. The study compares the inflammatory response between scarring and regeneration in the ear tissue of Mus musculus and Acomys cahirinus. The researchers found that both species exhibited an acute inflammatory response, with scarring characterized by stronger myeloperoxidase activity. In contrast, ROS production was stronger and more persistent during regeneration. They also demonstrate that macrophages are essential to stimulate regeneration and have a unique spatial distribution during regeneration. Additionally, the study shows that circulating leukocyte populations are similar in Acomys and Mus prior to injury, and that there is a peak increase of CD11b+ cells in Mus at D3 and a broader but smaller peak of CD11b+ cells in Acomys between D3 and 5. The study concludes that the findings suggest a more nuanced relationship between regeneration and immunity and that certain immune cells may be necessary to induce and sustain regeneration.
The chloroplast proteome contains thousands of different proteins that are imported into the chloroplast via the action of the TOC translocase and associated downstream systems. Recent research has revealed that the stability of the TOC complex is dynamically regulated by the ubiquitin-dependent chloroplast-associated protein degradation pathway, and now also by the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) system. Arabidopsis mutants representing almost the entire SUMO conjugation pathway can partially suppress the phenotype of ppi1, a pale-yellow mutant lacking the Toc33 protein. This suppression is linked to increased abundance of TOC proteins and improvements in chloroplast development. Moreover, molecular and biochemical experiments support a model in which the SUMO system directly regulates TOC protein stability. The study concludes that there is crosstalk between the SUMO system and the chloroplast protein import apparatus, emphasising the complexity of the regulation of the TOC translocase.
Researchers have identified the mechanism behind how neural circuits in the brain’s cortex perform analog computations with spiking neurons. Cortical neurons integrate thousands of synaptic inputs in their dendrites, but it was previously unknown how dendritic nonlinearities in individual cells contributed to computations at the level of neural circuits. It was found that dendritic nonlinearities are critical for the efficient integration of synaptic inputs in circuits performing analog computations with spiking neurons, and that dendritic integration allows postsynaptic neurons to integrate their richly structured synaptic inputs near-optimally. The researchers developed an approach which specifically focuses on naturally occurring statistical patterns of presynaptic activity that affect the transformation of analog activities varying continuously in time, conveying a limited amount of information about their rapidly fluctuating activities. The results suggest a novel functional role for dendritic nonlinearities in dynamically contributing to cortical computations.
The RNA binding protein, neuronal ELAV-like (nELAVL), which is associated with various neurological disorders, was investigated in human and mouse brains using crosslinking-immunoprecipitation and RNAseq techniques. The study found that nELAVL intronic and 3' UTR binding regulates neuronal RNA splicing and abundance, as well as binding to non-coding Y RNAs in Alzheimer's disease. nELAVL binds to transcripts important for neurological function and those linked to neurological diseases. Further research is needed to understand how nELAVL-mediated RNA regulation in the brain is linked with neurological disorders.
The design of the brain has evolved to be metabolically efficient, as the brain consumes a large amount of energy despite only comprising 2% of the body's mass. The processes of neural computation, transmission and synaptic plasticity are all highly metabolically demanding, and experimental evidence suggests that memory formation is also energetically expensive. Traditional learning algorithms are found to be highly inefficient in terms of energy consumption. The authors propose a new algorithm, synaptic caching, which balances labile forms of synaptic plasticity with more stable forms to increase energy efficiency manifold. This has relevance for energy efficient neuromorphic designs. The authors demonstrate that synaptic caching reduces the metabolic energy required to train a perceptron when compared to the traditional learning algorithm, and they propose that transient forms of plasticity can be used as a synaptic variable that accumulates the synaptic changes across multiple updates in a less expensive transient form of memory. The optimal balance between transient and persistent forms of plasticity can be achieved by tuning the consolidation threshold.
Researchers have developed a new method to understand changes in infectiousness during SARS-CoV-2 infections, which is critical for assessing the effectiveness of public health measures such as contact tracing. The new method uses data from known infector-infectee pairs to infer the infectiousness profile of infected individuals. The research revealed a high proportion of presymptomatic transmissions, highlighting the importance of continued contact tracing even if contacts from a short time window before symptom onset alone are traced. The study also found that the best-fitting model indicated a decrease in infectiousness following symptom onset, likely due to behavioural factors that reduce transmission risk. The results have implications for isolation and contact tracing strategies. The research provides an improved fit to data compared to previous models that assume infectiousness is independent of symptoms.
Bacteria often face hypoxia during association with hosts due to the formation of biofilms, leading to challenges in respiration. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacterium has two oxidases for the cbb3-type family, as well as two cbb3-type oxidase subunits, CcoN3Q3 and CcoN4Q4. CcoN4 has been shown to play a unique role in colony biofilm development and respiration in P. aeruginosa. This orphan subunit contributes to the reduction of phenazines and virulence in Caenorhabditis elegans infection. The differential regulation of the P. aeruginosa cco operons can affect their contributions to metabolic electron flow in biofilm subzones. Deletion of ccoN4 resulted in an altered colony phenotype reminiscent of strains defective in phenazine production and sensing.
Pathogens have the ability to reproduce both sexually through outcrossing and asexually or via selfing. While sex is assumed to be costly, mixed reproductive strategies in pathogens have remained puzzling. The ecological and evolutionary benefits of outcrossing are theoretically supported, but empirical support in pathogen populations is scarce. An analysis of the epidemiology and genetic structure of natural populations of an obligate fungal pathogen, Podosphaera plantaginis, found that the opportunities for outcrossing vary spatially. Populations supporting high levels of coinfection, a prerequisite of sex, result in hotspots of novel genetic diversity, and pathogen populations supporting coinfection have a higher probability of surviving winter. The findings provide evidence of ecological and evolutionary benefits of outcrossing in pathogens.
The document describes a new imaging technique, called quantitative label-free imaging with phase and polarization (QLIPP), that can measure the density, anisotropy, and orientation of structures in live cells and tissue slices without the need for labeling. The technique is combined with deep neural networks to predict fluorescence images of diverse cell and tissue structures. QLIPP images can reveal anatomical regions and axon tract orientation in prenatal human brain tissue sections. The authors report a variant of U-Net architecture, a multi-channel 2.5D U-Net, for computationally efficient prediction of fluorescence images in three dimensions and over large fields of view. They also develop data normalization methods for accurate prediction of myelin distribution over large brain regions. The proposed method will enable new studies of architectural order at spatial scales ranging from organelles to tissues.
Exosomes, small extracellular vesicles secreted by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), play a major role in the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells, according to an article in eLife. CAF-derived exosomes (CDEs) inhibit mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, and increasing glycolysis and glutamine-dependent reductive carboxylation in cancer cells. They supply amino acids to nutrient-deprived cells in a manner similar to macropinocytosis. Exosomes contain intact metabolites, including amino acids, lipids, and TCA-cycle intermediates that are avidly utilized by cancer cells. The authors claim the findings reveal a novel, metabolism-centric regulatory role of the tumour microenvironment (TME) through the delivery of CDEs, and can be used to target cancer cells in developing new therapies.
Diet has been shown to affect aging, with early experiments suggesting that reduced caloric intake could prolong lifespan. However, recent evidence indicates that other characteristics of the diet may be more influential in modulating aging. A study on Drosophila showed that behavior, metabolism, and lifespan were affected by whether flies were given a choice of different nutrients or a single complete medium, largely independent of the amount of nutrients consumed. The study revealed that meal choice elicits a rapid metabolic reprogramming that indicates a potentiation of the TCA cycle and amino acid metabolism, which requires the serotonin 2A receptor. Knockdown of an enzyme involved in the TCA pathway abrogated the effect of dietary choice on lifespan. These results indicate that dietary composition and the availability of specific nutrients are often more relevant than calories in shaping life histories and healthy aging.
Researchers have used a new technique to identify determinants of endothelial lineage, which involves fusion of murine embryonic stem cells (mESC) with human endothelial cells to create chimeric heterokaryons. A temporal pattern of gene expression was observed in the mESC of the heterokaryons, which mirrored ontogeny, with early mesodermal factors being expressed before mature endothelial genes. One of the newly identified transcriptional factors, POU class 3 homeobox 2 (Pou3f2), was confirmed to be important in differentiation to the endothelial lineage via loss and gain-of-function experiments. Its role in vascular development was validated in zebrafish embryos using morpholino oligonucleotides. The researchers propose an unbiased systematic approach to discover determinants of differentiation for more completely defining the genetic and epigenetic programs required for differentiating pluripotent stem cells to the endothelial phenotype.
This document discusses the importance of the capsids of non-enveloped viruses in viral biology and pathogenesis, their role in viral assembly, and how mutations affect viral fitness across different structural and functional attributes of the capsid. The document describes a study on the effects of mutations across the complete capsid region of a human picornavirus and how these mutations affect viral fitness. The research identifies structural and sequence determinants that predict mutational fitness effects and refine evolutionary analyses. The findings provide important insights into virus biology, evolution, and interaction with the host. The study also highlights the complex assembly path and protease cleavage sites of picornaviruses, including the identification of potential host targets of viral proteases.
The document explores the effects of stress on eating behaviors, particularly in rodents. It discusses the determinants of feeding responses to stress and how various factors, such as social isolation, diet, and body weight, influence anxiety-like behavior and food intake in male and female mice. The document also discusses sex differences in responsiveness to stress and the impact of stress intensity and type on eating behaviors. The novelty-suppressed feeding (NSF) assay is used to examine the effects of stress on food intake. The document discusses various experimental paradigms used to assess anxiety-like and feeding behaviors in mice and the impact of social isolation on feeding responses to stress in female mice. Overall, the document presents evidence that physiological and psychological traits, as well as properties of the stressor, influence the direction of eating responses to stress at the individual level.
Researchers have discovered a new iron storage system called encapsulins, which can store up to 23,000 iron atoms, 10-20 times more iron than ferritin proteins. Ferritin proteins had previously been the main iron storage system for animals, plants and microbes, but some organisms lack ferritins and it is unclear how they store iron. Encapsulins are a type of protein-based organelle that have recently been identified as involved in microbial iron and redox metabolism. The encapsulins form nanocompartments into which cargo proteinsload and are organised into operons in the genomes of the organisms that use them. The research was carried out on the Iron-Mineralizing Encapsulin-Associated Firmicute system (IMEF) found in Quasibacillus thermotolerans.
A study conducted in rural Bangladesh assessed the impact of water, sanitation, handwashing, and nutrition interventions on telomere length (TL) in children during their first two years of life. The study randomized pregnant women into different arms, including an intervention arm with a combined approach of nutrition and WSH. The results showed that children in the intervention arm had significantly shorter relative TL after one year of intervention, but their TL increased in the second year, while it decreased in the control group. There was no significant difference after two years between the intervention and control groups. The study suggests that rapid TL attrition during early childhood, a sensitive window of growth and development, could reflect improved growth in the intervention group rather than accumulated stress. The study highlights the potential impacts of early life environmental factors, such as nutrition and WSH, on childhood TL, a critical factor in lifelong health.
Positive-sense RNA viruses use intracellular membranes to create a site for viral RNA synthesis and interactions with host proteins, but very little is known about the host factors at the interface between replicase complexes and the host cytoplasm. Researchers have engineered a biotin ligase into a coronaviral replication/transcription complex (RTC) and identified more than 500 host proteins constituting the RTC microenvironment. They found that vesicular trafficking pathways, ubiquitin-dependent and autophagy-related processes, and translation initiation factors are important for the RTC. Detection of active translation in close proximity to the RTC highlighted the critical involvement of translation initiation factors during coronavirus replication. These findings provide a starting point for a comprehensive analysis of virus-host interactions that represent targets for therapeutic intervention.
Researchers have identified a pair of neurons in fruit fly larvae that have the capacity to coordinate the transition between backward and forward locomotion, contrary to the common belief that mutually exclusive activities were regulated by reciprocal inhibition. The so-called "mooncrawler descending neurons" can induce backward locomotion and block sudden forays forwards; the former using premotor neurons and the latter due to disynaptic inhibition. The researchers used intersectional genetics, genetic screens, circuit reconstructions, and optogenetics to identify the neurons, which drive larvae backwards whenever they come across a barrier or experience mild noxious stimulation at their anterior body. The neurons are found to survive metamorphosis, and triggering them caused backward walking even in adults. Activation and silencing of these neurons were sufficient to switch between forward and backward locomotion.
Visual crowding is a phenomenon that limits our ability to identify and discriminate peripheral objects due to nearby items. A model called the FS-model was developed that captured texture-like summary statistics by pooling spatial regions inspired by the receptive fields in primate visual cortex. The model has been interpreted as demonstrating a link between receptive field scaling, crowding, and our rich phenomenal experience. However, no previous paper has estimated the model's ability to produce metamers for natural scenes. The study aimed to test whether the FS-model can produce metamers by measuring the performance of human observers for images synthesised with different scale factors. The results showed that there was little evidence that the critical scale depended on the image content, and there was weak evidence for a difference in critical scale between texture-like and scene-like images. Overall, the study suggests that the FS-model can produce metamers for natural scenes.
Researchers have established and characterized endometrial assembloids, consisting of gland-like organoids and primary stromal cells to gain insights into the mechanisms of decidualized mid-luteal endometrium. Single-cell transcriptomics revealed that decidualized assembloids resemble midluteal endometrium, harbouring differentiated and senescent subpopulations in both glands and stroma. Acute senescence in glandular epithelium drives secretion of multiple canonical implantation factors, whereas in the stroma it calibrates the emergence of anti-inflammatory decidual cells and pro-inflammatory senescent decidual cells. The findings suggest that decidual senescence controls endometrial fate decisions and highlight how endometrial assembloids may accelerate the discovery of new treatments to prevent reproductive failure.
The aging population is at an increased risk for eye diseases, highlighting the need for improved imaging of eye disease mouse models. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a commonly used medical diagnostic tool, but it has limitations in terms of providing wide field of view and cellular or molecular information. Confocal microscopy can provide fluorescently labeled information, but it can distort tissue morphology in flat-mounting. Light-sheet fluorescent microscopy (LSFM) may be a solution as it can rapidly generate undistorted 3D images of the eye in its natural form with cellular and subcellular resolution. LSFM can be used to image the vasculature of intact whole samples such as the whole eyeball, iris, and optic nerve. LSFM can also be used to concurrently image neurons and vessels in the same sample, making it useful for eye disease studies. LSFM has the potential to advance our understanding of eye disease mechanisms, particularly in vascular and neurovascular biology fields, as well as ophthalmology.
Researchers have used human pluripotent stem-cell-derived human intestinal organoids (HIOs) to investigate how host-microbe interactions affect intestinal maturation and function in the immature human intestine. The HIOs were colonised with a non-pathogenic human-derived strain of E. coli, to investigate the global transcriptional changes in response to colonization. The study found that microbial colonization increased antimicrobial defenses and resulted in enhanced epithelial barrier function and integrity. The study also found that the HIO epithelium recapitulates many of the features of the immature intestinal epithelium. The HIOs could be stably colonised with as few as five colony-forming units of E. coli and remained stable for at least nine days.
Researchers have identified a new mechanism involved in the control of photosynthesis that could be used to design synthetic photosensors for use in optogenetics. A team from the Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology at the University of Bremen has found that LOV transcription factor Aureochrome 1a from the stramenopile algae Phaeodactylum tricornutum (PtAu1a) is involved in controlling the affinity of PtAu1a for its target DNA through modulating the interaction between the LOV and basic region leucine zipper DNA-binding domains. Light activation of PtAu1a increases its affinity nine-fold over the dark state. The researchers used hydrogen/deuterium-exchange coupled to mass spectrometry and small-angle X-ray scattering experiments to characterise the mechanism of light-dependent DNA binding of the LOV transcription factor.

This document explores the mechanism of pausing in transcription and its role in regulating gene expression. The authors investigate the elemental pause, a fundamental pause that can give rise to longer-lived pauses. They find that the elemental pause signal is multipartite and causes a conformational shift that inhibits template base loading but not RNA translocation. The authors propose a multistate model of elemental pausing in which template-base loading in a half-translocated offline intermediate limits pause escape. They also investigate backtracking and find that the ePEC readily equilibrates among several active-site states, including half-translocated, pretranslocated, and backtracked, with the half-translocated state being the dominant species in which the kinetic block to pause escape is manifest. Finally, the authors test the proposed role of different pause signal elements and find that they combine additively to affect pausing.
The study shows that a transcription factor called Tcf7l1a plays a key role in specifying the eye field during zebrafish eye development, but despite reduced eye field size in tcf7l1a mutants, these fish develop normal eyes due to compensatory growth mechanisms. The study also found that the eye is sensitised to the effects of additional mutations, as seen in a synthetic modifier screen that identified mutations that give synthetically enhanced eye specification or growth phenotypes when in combination with the tcf7l1a mutation. These observations suggest that even though tcf7l1a-/- is a fully penetrant null mutation, lack of maternal and zygotic tcf7l1a function alone does not lead to loss of eyes in all genetic backgrounds. The study adds to a growing body of research revealing a variety of mechanisms by which the developing embryo can cope with the effects of deleterious genetic mutations.
The Tim23 complex in the inner mitochondrial membrane is responsible for importing positively charged presequence proteins. The Tim23 channel allows the passage of polypeptides with a secondary structure and its cation selectivity is important for recognizing and transporting positively charged presequences through the channel. Mutations of amino acid residues associated with this selectivity caused reduced import capacity and substrate insensitivity. The selectivity lies with highly conserved, pore-lining amino acids. The TIM23 complex mostly consists of the Tim23 subunit and its homolog Tim17. The receptor protein Tim50 and Mgr2 are also subunits of the presequence translocase. Tim23 forms a voltage-activated, water-filled pore that is regulated by the Tim50 receptor and has sensitivity towards presequence peptides and full-length preproteins. Inability to conduct cations led to mutant Tim23 channels exhibiting growth defects and impaired import of mitochondrial proteins. Tim23N150A was identified as having the most significant effect. Mutated channels had normal integrity and integration with the TIM23 complex except for significantly reduced cation preference. Tim23N150A's reduced import capabilities were linked to its altered cation selectivity.
A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial tested the effect of a 6-week high-intensity interval training (HIT) regimen on measures of cognitive control and working memory in 318 children aged 7-13 years. The study found that the 6-week HIT regimen resulted in improvements in measures of cognitive control and working memory moderated by BDNF genotype, with met66 carriers showing larger gains post-exercise than val66 homozygotes. The study suggests a promising alternative to enhance cognition via short and potent exercise regimens. Exercise-induced cognitive improvements have traditionally been observed following sustained sessions of moderate intensity. This study aimed to address interindividual variability and isolate the underlying factors of improvement, as well as investigate the specific influence of exercise intensity. Despite similarities in the physiological mechanisms linking aerobic exercise and HIT on cognition, the precise impact of the latter on cognitive performance remains to be confirmed experimentally.
The time-dependent rate of origin firing during eukaryotic DNA replication presents a universal bell shape, which has previously been thought to result from a complex interaction between origins and firing factors. However, this paper proposes a simpler explanation involving the diffusion of replication fork components towards localized potential replication origins (p-oris). The authors show that a competition between the firing time and the time needed to replicate DNA separating two neighbouring p-oris can account for the bell shape curve. They predict that the maximal value of the origin firing rate is the product of the replication fork speed with the squared p-ori density. The paper also details the stochastic process of DNA replication kinetics and explains how the interaction between p-oris and limiting origin firing factors can result in the observed bell shape curve.
The dysfunction of noradrenergic (NE) neurons has been linked to bipolar disorder, but the role of ErbB4, a receptor tyrosine kinase highly expressed in NE neurons, in regulating NE neuronal function and contributing to the disorder was unclear. Researchers found that the conditional deletion of ErbB4 in locus coeruleus (LC) NE neurons increases neuronal spontaneous firing through NMDA receptor hyperfunction and elevates catecholamines in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Furthermore, mice with Erbb4 deletion presented mania-like behaviors, which were completely rescued by the anti-manic drug lithium or antagonists of catecholaminergic receptors. These findings suggest the crucial role of ErbB4 signaling in regulating LC-NE neuronal function and contribute to the pathology of mania-associated psychiatric disorders.
This document describes a study investigating the mechanism by which Toxoplasma gondii, an obligate intracellular parasite that infects humans, modifies its host cell in order to promote survival and dissemination. The researchers identify a novel host cell effector export pathway that requires the Golgi-resident aspartyl protease 5 (ASP5). They demonstrate that ASP5 cleaves a highly constrained amino acid motif that has similarity to the PEXEL-motif of Plasmodium parasites. The researchers show that ASP5 matures substrates at both the N- and C-terminal ends of proteins and also controls trafficking of effectors without this motif. Furthermore, ASP5 controls establishment of the nanotubular network and is required for the efficient recruitment of host mitochondria to the vacuole. The study characterizes the first identified machinery required for export of Toxoplasma effectors into the infected host cell.
Closed-loop vagus nerve stimulation (CLV), based on the synaptic eligibility trace, promotes substantial recovery from spinal cord injury (SCI) by strengthening synaptic connectivity and thus enhancing plasticity in specific networks to restore function. CLV triggers the release of pro-plasticity factors such as norepinephrine, acetylcholine, serotonin, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and fibroblast growth factor, which influence expression and phosphorylation of proteins associated with structural and synaptic plasticity, including Arc, CaMKII, TrkB, and glutamate receptors. Neuromodulatory networks activate a transient synaptic eligibility trace to support spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), raising the prospect that closed-loop neuromodulatory strategies may provide a means to direct specific, long-lasting plasticity to enhance recovery after neurological injury. Precisely timed CLV is required to promote such plasticity and it must be delivered within seconds of a successful movement. The flexibility of CLV to promote reorganization in a range of pathways is a critical benefit given the large variety of etiology, location, and extent of damage in SCI patients. The closed-loop neuromodulation strategy developed here is minimally invasive and safe and has the potential to revolutionize the rehabilitation process for SCI patients.
Autoinducers are small molecules produced by microbes that trigger coordinated gene expression and collective behavior in microbial populations, known as quorum sensing. Recent experiments have shown a heterogeneous promoter activity of autoinducer synthase genes, suggesting that some cells in a population produce autoinducers while others do not. In this theoretical model, cells synthesize and secrete autoinducers into the environment, up-regulate their production in response, and non-producers replicate faster than producers. The coupling between ecological and population dynamics through quorum sensing induces phenotypic heterogeneity in microbial populations, suggesting an alternative mechanism to stochastic gene expression in bistable gene regulatory circuits. This model has implications for understanding collective microbial behavior, such as virulence and bioluminescence.
Desmosomes are cell junctions that integrate mechanical and chemical signaling to regulate tissue morphogenesis and homeostasis. They play a role in epidermal differentiation by attenuating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) activity. The desmosomal cadherin, Dsg1, is required for maintaining epidermal tissue integrity in superficial layers and promoting keratinocyte differentiation as cells transit out of the basal layer by down-regulating EGFR family activity. Recent studies have revealed that desmosomes can also act as signaling scaffolds to ensure the biochemical differentiation program's spatial and temporal execution. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is an eight-subunit complex that functions as a Nedd8 isopeptidase to remove Nedd8 moieties from cullin-RING E3 ligases, which regulate fundamental processes for tissue homeostasis. In this report, researchers show that the Cops3 subunit of the CSN interacts with desmosomal components, Dsg1, and Desmoplakin (Dp). Loss of Cops3 results in an increase in phosphorylated EGFR (pEGFR), which is associated with compromised keratinocyte differentiation, suggesting that Cops3 and the CSN inhibit EGFR signaling to promote differentiation. The data support a model whereby epidermal differentiation is assisted by desmosome-dependent scaffolding of the CSN complex to down-regulate EGFR through removal of Nedd8 modifications.
The amygdala, a part of the brain connected to emotional processes, may enhance spatial attention to sensory stimuli associated with rewarding or aversive experiences. Studies have shown that amygdala neural activity encodes spatial information about reward-predictive stimuli and correlates with spatial attention allocation. The amygdala may therefore modulate spatial attention allocation to emotionally significant stimuli of both valences (rewarding and threatening). In an experiment with monkeys, individual amygdala neurons were recorded while they were performing a task in which stimuli associated with aversive or appetitive outcomes attracted spatial attention. The amygdala neurons represented the spatial location of both reward- and punishment-predicting stimuli, and modulation occurred in the same direction for both types of stimuli. These results suggest that the amygdala provides a means for modulating the neuronal networks responsible for spatial attention allocation to emotionally significant stimuli of both valences.
The splicing factor Rbfox2 is essential for normal neural crest development and embryonic craniofacial bone formation. Its deletion in neural crest cells leads to cleft palate and defects in craniofacial bone development due to impaired regulation of splicing and expression of essential genes. Rbfox2-TGF-β-Tak1 signaling axis is also deregulated by Rbfox2 deletion. Rbfox2 is expressed in neural crest cells, neural crest-derived palate shelves, dorsal root ganglia, and somites. The positive feedback loop of TGF-β signaling promotes expression of Rbfox2 in NCCs contributing to proper formation of craniofacial and cardiovascular structures. Rbfox2 is important for embryonic and neonatal lethality and is essential for the development of neural crest-derived cranial structures.
A new study has demonstrated that the initiation of flu epidemics is triggered by a complex set of conditions, including socio-economic and ethno-demographic properties of the host population, weather variables such as specific humidity, temperature, and solar radiation, virus antigenic drift over time, and recent spatio-temporal dynamics reflected in influenza wave auto-correlation. The study used several longitudinal datasets on the disease and health status of over 150 million human subjects observed over a decade, alongside computational methods to model the spread of infection. The results offer potential for the formulation of new population-level intervention and mitigation policies.
Male plant bugs use antiaphrodisiac pheromones to reduce the attractiveness of mated females to other males, reducing competition for their sperm. However, this mechanism can prove costly to females and other males. In the Lygus hesperus species, seminal fluids contain myristyl acetate and geranylgeranyl acetate which suppress male courtship by rendering the female temporarily unattractive. Females have been observed to release geranylgeraniol which counteracts the antiaphrodisiac effect, producing the first evidence of an anti-antiaphrodisiac pheromone. This mechanism has added further complexity to the communication mechanisms used to regulate reproductive behaviours in a number of insect species.
RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are important in post-transcriptional regulation during axon regeneration. In C. elegans, UNC-75, a member of the CELF family of RBPs, is required for axon regeneration. Through CLIP-seq analysis, researchers identified a set of genes involved in synaptic transmission as mRNA targets of UNC-75, and found that UNC-75 regulates alternative splicing of mRNA isoforms of Syntaxin/unc-64. In mice, Celf2 expression is upregulated after peripheral nerve injury and Celf2 mutant mice are defective in axon regeneration. Multiple Syntaxin genes were identified as CELF2 targets. These findings reveal a conserved pro-regeneration pathway at the level of alternative splicing. UNC-75 is required for regenerative axon extension but dispensable or a negative regulator of regenerative growth cone formation.UNC-75 interacts non-redundantly with known neuronal splicing regulators and with the regrowth promoting MAP kinase kinase kinase DLK-1 and regrowth inhibiting factor EFA-6.
The article describes a bioinformatic approach, called genome neighborhood network (GNN), which enables large scale prediction of the in vitro enzymatic activities and in vivo physiological functions of uncharacterized enzymes in protein families. The approach was used to predict in vitro activities and in vivo functions in the proline racemase superfamily (PRS) by analyzing the sequence similarity network (SSN) and genome neighborhoods. The predictions were verified through various experimentations, including high-throughput protein expression and purification, in vitro enzyme activity measurements, microbiology, and X-ray crystallography. The approach is helpful in identifying all the enzymes/transport systems/transcriptional regulators in a conserved metabolic pathway.
Psychological studies show that when bigger stimuli activate bigger pools of neurons, the results could lead to impoverished perceptual performance. To understand this paradoxical finding, researchers conducted experiments with monkeys, training them to discriminate a visual stimulus, addressing three mechanisms: noise correlations, neural suppression, and read-out strategy. The results indicate that the paradoxical percepts reflect a trade-off between sensitivity and noise in neuronal populations. Such research advances our understanding of the relationship between neural activity and perception in both normal and pathological states.
The adult frog retina contains active neural stem cells that contribute to continuous eye growth throughout life. Yap, a downstream effector of the Hippo pathway, is specifically expressed in these stem cells. Knocking down Yap leads to an increased occurrence of DNA damage and cell death due to abnormal progression of DNA replication. These results indicate that YAP is required in adult retinal stem cells to regulate the temporal firing of replication origins and quality control of replicated DNA. YAP is implicated in tissue regeneration, but its effects are controversial. In the post-embryonic retina, Yap is expressed in the most peripheral stem cell-containing region of the ciliary marginal zone (CMZ). Yap overexpression leads to retinal stem cell overproliferation, while Yap knockdown decreases eye size and EdU incorporation in the post-embryonic retina.
Desmoplasia, a fibrotic mass that includes cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and an extracellular matrix (D-ECM), is a feature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), but conflicting studies have identified both tumor-restricting and tumor-promoting roles of this process. The authors of this study used 3D cultures to identify a CAF/D-ECM phenotype that correlates with improved patient outcomes and found that TGFβ is required for D-ECM production but not for fibroblast-to-CAF activation. They also discovered that stromal localization and levels of active SMAD2/3 and α5β1-integrin distinguish protective from detrimental desmoplasia and predict tumor recurrence, making it a useful new prognostic tool. The study suggests therapies that could stabilize patient-protective or revert patient-detrimental stroma.
The enzyme glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) is a key regulator of many cellular signaling pathways and is controlled by inhibition rather than activation. In the insulin pathway, phosphorylation of a serine on the GSK-3 generates an inhibitory peptide, while in the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, phosphorylation of sequences on the Wnt co-receptors LRP5/6 inhibits GSK-3 activity in a different way. Crystal structures of GSK-3 bound to its phosphorylated N-terminus and to two of the phosphorylated LRP6 motifs have revealed a mechanism of primed substrate recognition and provided insights into target sequence preferences. Understanding how GSK-3 is controlled will help to design inhibitors specific to particular pathways that it regulates, and is important for potential therapeutic targets for diabetes and neurological disorders.
The authors propose that pulmonary edema in COVID-19 patients is due to a local vascular problem caused by the activation of the bradykinin 1 and 2 receptors on endothelial cells in the lungs. SARS-CoV-2 enters cells via ACE2, which inactivates des-Arg9 bradykinin, the potent ligand of the B1 receptor. Without ACE2 acting as a guardian, the lung environment is prone to local vascular leakage leading to angioedema. The authors hypothesize that a kinin-dependent local lung angioedema via B1R and eventually B2R is an important feature of COVID-19, and propose that blocking the B2R and inhibiting plasma kallikrein activity might have an ameliorating effect on early disease caused by COVID-19 and might prevent acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The authors also suggest several targets for potential intervention, including blocking tissue and/or plasma kallikrein activity, activating the degradation of kinins by treating with recombinant active enzymes, inhibiting the common downstream signaling of B1R and B2R, and suppressing local NO. The most potent and logical intervention would be to block B1R and B2R signaling, and the authors suggest the use of the B2R inhibitor icatibant.
Metabolic biomarkers measured by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy could be associated with susceptibility to severe pneumonia and COVID-19. A multi-biomarker score, comprised of 25 proteins, fatty acids, amino acids, and lipids, was associated equally strongly with enhanced susceptibility to severe COVID-19 and severe pneumonia events occurring 7-11 years after blood sampling. However, the risk for severe pneumonia occurring during the first 2 years after blood sampling for people with elevated levels of the multi-biomarker score was over four times higher than for long-term risk. These findings suggest that metabolic biomarker profiling could potentially complement existing tools for identifying individuals at high risk.
The venom insulin, Con-Ins G1, found in the cone snail Conus geographus has unique characteristics relevant to the design of new insulin therapies. Fish-hunting cone snails provide a diverse range of minimized ligands of the vertebrate insulin receptor, and these insulins activate the human insulin receptor. When tested on zebrafish and mice, venom insulins were shown to significantly lower blood glucose in the streptozotocin-induced model of diabetes. The cone snails have thus evolved molecular mechanisms of insulin receptor activation that provide insight into designing fast-acting insulin analogs for the treatment of diabetes.
Researchers from Yale University have discovered that ATP, a molecule that stores energy in cells, is a key factor in the immune response against viruses. In particular, they have found ATP binds to a protein called RIG-I, which identifies viral RNA, thereby activating an immune response. The Yale researchers found that ATP binding was essential to the immune response, but ATP hydrolysis plays a valuable role by helping to separate non-pathogenic RNA from RIG-I, making the immune response more specific. By distinguishing between endogenous (self) and pathogenic RNA, ATP influences the induction and regulation of RIG-1 signalling.
Researchers investigated the function of the STK/LATS/YAP/TAZ signalling pathway in regulating SOX2 positive pituitary stem cells (PSCs) during development and normal pituitary function. They found that restricting YAP/TAZ activation during development is necessary for normal organ size and specification from SOX2+ PSCs. Postnatal deletion of LATS kinases and subsequent upregulation of YAP/TAZ leads to uncontrolled clonal expansion of the SOX2+ PSCs and disruption of their differentiation, causing the formation of non-secreting, aggressive pituitary tumors. These findings identify the LATS/YAP/TAZ signalling cascade as an essential component of PSC regulation in normal pituitary physiology and tumorigenesis.
Researchers have identified a new transmissible cancer that has crossed the species barrier between two different clam species in the seas of Southern Europe. Hemic neoplasia (HN), a type of leukaemia cancer, has been found in multiple species of bivalves, including oysters, mussels, cockles, and clams. Although typically these cancers are transmitted between individuals from the same species, on occasion they can infect and propagate across populations from a different bivalve species. This new research, which uses multiplatform next-generation genome sequencing technologies, confirms cancer contagion between two different clam species, namely warty venus (Venus verrucosa) and striped venus (Chamelea gallina). The results suggest that this contagious cancer originated in striped venus clams and later transmitted to clams of the species warty venus.
RAD52 is a DNA repair protein that is an emerging therapeutic target for BRCA-deficient tumors. Depletion of RAD52 is synthetically lethal with defects in tumor suppressors BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, and participates in the recovery of stalled replication forks. Researchers carried out a high throughput screening campaign to identify compounds that disrupt the RAD52-ssDNA interaction, and found lead compounds that were confirmed as RAD52 inhibitors in biochemical assays. Computational analysis found that these inhibitors bind within the ssDNA-binding groove of the RAD52 oligomeric ring. This discovery may lead to the advancement of personalized cancer treatments, as RAD52 inhibitors are expected to selectively kill cancerous cells. Understanding synthetically lethal relationships between genome caretakers will help to define the molecular mechanisms underlying the maintenance of genomic integrity.
Liver X receptors (LXRs) are transcriptional regulators of lipid homeostasis with anti-inflammatory effects. While their anti-inflammatory mechanism is not fully understood, it has been proposed that LXRs tether indirectly to inflammatory gene promoters. The authors of this study suggest that LXR's ability to regulate lipid metabolism through transcription activation is what represses inflammatory gene expression, and this can occur in the absence of SUMOylation. Additionally, LXR inhibits signaling from TLRs 2, 4 and 9 through changes in membrane lipid organization that disrupt the recruitment of MyD88 and TRAF6. These findings suggest that direct transcriptional activation is the common mechanism underlying LXR's dual biological functions in metabolism and inflammation.
A new research article in the journal eLife reports that a previously unknown calcium-activated chloride channel dubbed 'subdued' has been identified in Drosophila melanogaster that plays a role in host defense. &nbsp;The researchers suggest that this channel is evolutionarily conserved and that it may be possible to discover novel broad-spectrum antimicrobial drugs targeting conserved aspects of chloride channel biology.
Researchers have developed a new method for analysing the activity of tens to hundreds of neurons in the brain simultaneously, enabling them to draw conclusions about brain function, according to a paper in the journal eLife. The new approach, called 'demixed principal component analysis' or dPCA, allows researchers to analyse population data from numerous different species, cortical areas and experimental tasks. The method exposed how the neural population responds to stimuli and makes decisions. The technique decomposes population activity to a few components and summarises task-dependent features in a single figure, making it useful for visualising the data. It is said to be more flexible and have an analytical solution, meaning that it does not suffer from numerical optimisation problems.

The protein ORCA/LRWD1, required for DNA replication, is found in heterochromatic regions in post-replicated cells. It recognizes methylated H3K9 marks and interacts with repressive lysine methyltransferases (KMTs), including G9a/GLP and Suv39H1, in a chromatin context-dependent manner. ORCA helps to establish and maintain heterochromatin structure by acting as a scaffold for the establishment of H3K9 KMT complex and stabilizing H3K9 KMT complex. In the absence of ORCA, cells show alterations in chromatin architecture, with significantly reduced H3K9 di- and tri-methylation at specific chromatin sites, leading to abnormal heterochromatin organization and alteration in replication timing. ORCA interacts with multiple repressive histone lysine methyltransferases, including G9a, GLP, and Suv39H1, and the interaction is direct and independent of DNA. ORCA interacts with G9a through its LRR-containing fragment and with Suv39H1 through its SET domain.
The K+-Cl- cotransporter KCC2 is essential for hyperpolarizing inhibition in the central nervous system. A study used functional proteomics to identify KCC2 protein interactions and found that KCC2 interacts with PACSIN1, a neuronal endocytic regulatory protein that is a novel and potent negative regulator of KCC2, contributing to neurological disorders including epilepsy and neuropathic pain. The study also found that KCC2 is highly localized in excitatory synapses where it regulates spine morphogenesis and AMPA receptor confinement, as well as regulation of excitatory synaptic transmission. Multiple posttranslational mechanisms regulate KCC2, including protein interactions. The study performed unbiased affinity purifications of native-KCC2 coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry, finding that native KCC2 exists in macromolecular complexes comprised of interacting partners from diverse classes of transmembrane and soluble proteins, including putative KCC2 partners segregated into high-confidence (platinum, gold), moderate-confidence (silver), or lower confidence (bronze) interactors. The study proposed an interactome of 181 members for KCC2.
A new study suggests that non-coding RNAs may play a role in epithelial ovarian cancer and that circulating miRNAs (short non-coding RNAs) have the potential to develop a non-invasive diagnostic test for ovarian cancer. Using sequencing of circulating miRNAs, the study developed a neural network algorithm for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer that outperformed current biomarker CA125 in terms of specificity and false positives. After using 325 samples to adapt the neural network to qPCR measurements, the model was validated using 51 independent clinical samples with a positive predictive value of 91.3% and a negative predictive value of 78.6%. Additionally, biologic relevance was tested using in situ hybridization on 30 pre-metastatic lesions, showing intratumoral concentration of relevant miRNAs. This study suggests that these circulating miRNAs have potential as a non-invasive diagnostic test for ovarian cancer.
A study analyzed over 11,000 RNA sequencing libraries across 36 tissue/cell types to understand how the transcriptional regime of the mitochondrial genome varies between individuals and tissues. The study found considerable variation in mitochondrial-encoded gene expression along the mitochondrial transcriptome, across tissues and between individuals, highlighting the importance of cell-type specific and post-transcriptional processes in shaping mitochondrial-encoded RNA levels. Using whole-genome genetic data, the study identified 64 nuclear loci associated with expression levels of 14 genes encoded in the mitochondrial genome, including missense variants within genes involved in mitochondrial function, implicating genetic mechanisms that act in trans across the two genomes. The genetic variants linked to these nuclear loci were associated with cardio-metabolic phenotypes and vitiligo, supporting a potential role for variable mitochondrial-encoded gene expression in complex disease.
The Origin Recognition Complex (ORC), thought to be necessary for DNA replication in eukaryotic cells, has been found by researchers to not be essential for replication. By disrupting both alleles of ORC2 or the ATPase subunit ORC1, the researchers discovered that human cell lines continued to proliferate with intact chromosomal origins of replication. The ORC1 or ORC2-depleted cells replicate with decreased chromatin loading of MCM2-7 and become dependent on another ATPase, CDC6, for survival and DNA replication. The study suggests that either the ORC ring lacking a subunit, even its ATPase subunit, can load enough MCM2-7 in partnership with CDC6 to initiate DNA replication, or cells have an ORC-independent, CDC6-dependent mechanism to load MCM2-7 on origins of replication.
The document discusses the use of a phylogenetic test to determine whether seasonal influenza vaccination stimulates additional evolution of responding B cell lineages, specifically through an increase in somatic hypermutation (SHM) frequency. The study uses simulations and longitudinal BCR sequence data from multiple conditions to validate the test and finds that measurable B cell evolution is highly compartmentalized, with most circulating lineages in the blood unlikely to measurably evolve following vaccination. However, a subset of memory B cell lineages containing GC B cells frequently measurably evolve, suggesting that seasonal influenza virus vaccination can stimulate additional evolution of responding B cell lineages.
Changes in cytoplasmic mRNA decay can directly impact protein localization, providing a mechanism to connect seemingly distal stages of gene expression, according to a research article in Cell Reports. Scientists from the University of California used a quantitative liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry-based approach to reveal that the changing mRNA decay landscape, as frequently occurs during viral infection, results in subcellular redistribution of RNA binding proteins in human cells. The study suggests a new role for cytoplasmic poly (A) binding protein in mediating mRNA decay-driven repression of RNA polymerase II promoter recruitment, indicating that cytoplasmic mRNA decay impacts early events in pre-initiation complex assembly.
Researchers have discovered how a protein alters the effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) on an important potassium channel in the heart. The potassium channel KV7.1 is a proposed target for anti-arrhythmic drugs, and is co-assembled with an auxiliary subunit called KCNE1 in the IKs channel complex in the heart, which is critical for cardiomyocyte repolarisation. The study found that neutralisation of negatively charged residues in the S5-P-helix loop of KV7.1 restored PUFA effects on the channel complex. KCNE1 moves the S5-P-helix loop of KV7.1 towards the PUFA-binding site, which indirectly causes PUFA protonation, reducing the effect of PUFAs on KV7.1. A mechanistic understanding of how KCNE1 alters KV7.1 pharmacology is essential for the development of drugs targeting the IKs channel.
Researchers have developed a new technique for identifying specific T cell responses to shared antigens in cancer patients, which allows for a more comprehensive examination of the immune response than previous methods focused on a subset of ethnic groups. The technique involves using peptide-exchangeable peptide/HLA multimers and artificial antigen-presenting cells to map shared antigenic epitopes recognized by tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes (TILs) across different class I alleles. The researchers also isolated cognate T cell receptor genes with tumor reactivity. Identifying T cell responses to shared antigens is important because they can be targeted with potent on-target efficacy and minimal off-target toxicity in T cell receptor gene therapy. The researchers demonstrated the versatility of their technique by identifying novel class I epitopes and detecting cognate T cells for six shared antigens frequently expressed by melanomas. They also molecularly cloned T cell receptor genes identified from melanoma TILs, which could be used in T cell receptor gene therapy clinical trials.
This document discusses the post-endocytic trafficking of membrane proteins, specifically the yeast monocarboxylate transporter Jen1. The study found that the ubiquitin ligase Rsp5 and the glucose-regulated arrestin-related trafficking adaptors (ART) protein Rod1, involved in the glucose-induced internalization of Jen1, are also required for the post-endocytic sorting of Jen1 to the yeast lysosome. This new step takes place at the trans-Golgi network (TGN), where Rod1 localizes dynamically upon triggering endocytosis. The study also highlights the role of ubiquitin conjugation to endocytic cargoes as a major determinant of their intracellular sorting in the endocytic pathway.
Researchers have identified a histone variant, H2be, which is exclusively expressed by olfactory chemosensory neurons and affects olfactory function and olfactory receptor (OR) representation in the adult olfactory epithelium. H2be expression varies among olfactory neurons but is stereotyped according to the co-expressed OR. H2be expression is reduced by sensory activity and promotes neuronal cell death, such that inactive olfactory neurons display higher levels of the variant and shorter lifespans. Loss of H2be causes defects in olfactory function, suggesting a role for H2be in modulating olfactory neuron population dynamics to adapt the OR repertoire to the environment.
Homologous transcription factors (TFs) often co-exist in cells, leading to seemingly redundant regulation of their target genes. In this study, the yeast stress response TFs Msn2 and Msn4 were used as a model to study the functional relevance of closely related TFs in the same single cells. Using quantitative single-cell imaging and microfluidics, the researchers found that Msn2 and Msn4 have non-redundant and distinct functions in combinatorial gene regulation, enabling diversified gene expression responses within a cell population that may benefit survival under rapidly changing environments. They found that Msn4 plays a crucial role in inducing target genes with slow activation kinetics, while fully inducible target genes with fast activation kinetics can be activated by either Msn2 or Msn4. This behavior is analogous to logic gate systems, and the study suggests that homologous transcription factors in other organisms may have similar time-based modes of combinatorial gene regulation.
This document discusses the importance of proper cellular component localization in cellular functions such as division and motility. The mechanism of how cells achieve this localization is not completely understood, especially in large cells like oocytes. The document presents a study that examines actin-based positioning mechanisms in artificial cells created using Xenopus egg extracts encapsulated in water-in-oil droplets. The study finds that the localization of the contraction center varies depending on the size of the droplets, with a symmetrical configuration in larger droplets and a polar configuration in smaller ones. The mechanism for centering is based on a hydrodynamic mechanism using Darcy friction between the contracting network and the surrounding cytoplasm, and it weakens considerably during interphase. The study investigates possible implications of these findings for intracellular centering and symmetry breaking.
The genetic basis for mammalian sex maintenance involves particular genes staying active in the gonads to avoid sex reprogramming. Sox9 and Sox8 are genes that are necessary for male fertility, and they control the expression of structural proteins and protect Sertoli cells from early apoptosis. If Sox9 is ablated in Sertoli cells of adult, fertile Sox8-/- mice, genetic reprogramming occurs, and Sertoli cells transdifferentiate into granulosa-like cells, causing complete degeneration of the seminiferous tubules. Sox9, together with Sox8 and Dmrt1, controls adult testis maintenance by maintaining Dmrt1 expression, preventing Foxl2 expression, and controlling the expression of structural proteins in the testis. Sox genes encode an essential group of transcription factors with relevant roles in many aspects of pre- and post-natal development of vertebrates and other animal taxa. The study shows that Sox9 and Sox8 maintain the function and integrity of the adult mouse testis. Sox9 is necessary to maintain Dmrt1 expression and prevent Foxl2 expression, and double mutant testes exhibit complete degeneration of the seminiferous tubules and increased apoptosis.
Researchers have discovered that a cage-shaped actin (F-actin) network is essential for maintaining tight spatial organization of Ca2+ channels for auditory inner hair cells in the ear that are responsible for converting sound pressure into analogous voltage waveforms. The F-actin network also provides mechanosensitivity to the Ca2+ channels in varying hydrostatic pressure. The F-actin mesh network that attaches to synaptic ribbons directly influences the efficiency of otoferlin-dependent exocytosis and its sensitivity to hydrostatic pressure. The researchers propose a new model for vesicle exocytosis in auditory hair cells where the rate of vesicle recruitment to ribbons is mainly controlled by a synaptic F-actin network and changes in hydrostatic pressure.
Msp1 is an AAA ATPase enzyme found in mitochondria and peroxisomes of budding yeast that prevents accumulation of mistargeted tail-anchored (TA) proteins. This study used live-cell quantitative microscopy and drug-inducible gene expression to understand the function of Msp1. The study found that Msp1 turns over a fraction of peroxisomal Pex15, indicating that Msp1 selects substrates based on the solitary membrane existence of proteins. The research revealed a conserved mechanism for Msp1 in correcting errors in TA protein sorting, and its potential in blocking substrate insertion into the mitochondrial outer membrane. Additionally, the study found that Msp1 extracts fully integrated substrates from mitochondrial outer membranes and that Pex15 interacts with the peroxisomal membrane protein Pex3, shielding Pex15 from Msp1-dependent turnover. Finally, the study proposed that native mitochondrial TA proteins are protected from Msp1 recognition by extrinsic mitochondrial factors.
The medial temporal lobes (MTL) are responsible for more than just memory processes. The hippocampus (HC) and perirhinal cortex (PrC) are necessary for accurate perceptual discrimination of conjunctive scene and face stimuli, respectively. The microstructure of the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), connecting occipital and ventro-anterior temporal lobe including PrC, and the fornix, the main HC input/output pathway, correlated with accuracy on judgments involving faces and scenes respectively. Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) response in PrC and HC elicited during oddity judgments was correlated with face and scene oddity performance respectively. These three-way associations highlight the functionally differentiated, structurally instantiated MTL neurocognitive networks for complex face and scene perception.
The study investigated how primary motor cortex (M1) and dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) represented reach direction during a task where monkeys had to estimate the location of reach targets based on noisy and uncertain visual cues. The study found that with increased uncertainty, neurons in PMd represented unlikely movements throughout both planning and execution, while M1 only reflected the direction of the executed reach. The magnitude of this effect was variable across sessions and was correlated with the monkey's behavioral uncertainty. The study suggests that PMd represents and maintains a full distribution of potentially correct actions in uncertain situations, while M1 only represents the executed movement.
Researchers have uncovered the mechanism by which herpesviruses envelop new virus particles in infected cells, providing a structural framework for understanding the assembly process behind a group of very common viruses. Herpesviruses encompass a wide range of illnesses, including cold sores, genital herpes and viral encephalitis. The researchers found that herpes simplex virus (HSC) proteins pUL7 and pUL51 assist in the enveloping process by forming a complex, the pUL7:pUL51, which is conserved across human herpesviruses. The researchers used chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry to characterise the molecular interaction between pUL7 and pUL51 in the solution, also revealing a new compact fold in pUL7, dubbed the CUSTARD fold.
The study shows that SIRT6, a protein involved in DNA repair, is also a sensor of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), the most damaging form of DNA damage. SIRT6 recognizes DSBs through a tunnel-like structure and activates downstream signaling for DSB repair. The research also reveals that SIRT6 recruits to sites of damage independently of known DSB sensors and is upstream of ATM and H2AX phosphorylation. Moreover, SIRT6 exhibits an affinity for open DNA ends, particularly single-stranded DNA, and protects the open ends of DNA from exonuclease activity, indicating that it specifically binds to DNA ends. The findings suggest that SIRT6 plays a key role in initiating the DNA damage response and preventing genomic instability.
The study examines the association between Drosophila sechellia and its toxic host, Morinda citrifolia, and the adaptation process of insects to toxic hosts. The fruit of Morinda citrifolia provides l-DOPA, necessary for successful reproduction in D. sechellia, and increases egg size, promoting early fitness. This adaptation has caused D. sechellia to become an obligate specialist on M. citrifolia. The study highlights how an insect's dopaminergic system modulates ontogenesis and development to sustain ecological adaptations. The results enhance our understanding of reproductive behavior in Drosophila and suggest an ontogenetic mechanism of insect adaptation to toxic hosts.
A new study shows that reduced expression of the kinase-anchoring protein, Gravin, contributes to the development of seminomas, germ line-derived cancer of the testis. The study found that Gravin is required for the symmetrical division and differentiation of germ cells through the proper placement of the mitotic spindle. Gravin was shown to anchor Aurora A and Plk1 during the critical stages of mitosis, and depletion of Gravin leads to both a higher mitotic index and disorganisation of the seminiferous tubules. Experiments involving Gravin-deficient mice showed that a lack of Gravin correlate with an overabundance of Oct3/4-positive germ line stem cells, which display a randomised orientation of mitotic spindles. The study offers new insights into the complex mechanistic interactions that regulate mitosis and could lead to a better understanding of how germ line-derived cancers emerge.

New dating techniques have been used to determine the age of Homo naledi fossils found in the Dinaledi Chamber, revealing that the hominin species existed between 236,000 and 335,000 years ago, much more recently than previously thought based on their morphology. Sedimentary dating and optical luminescence was applied to establish all the Homo naledi fossils were from a single stratigraphic unit, likely to have been deposited between 236,000 and 414,000 years ago. Teeth from the fossils were also analysed using U-series and electron spin resonance techniques, confirming these analyses supported a maximum age scenario, providing an average age for the two least altered fossil teeth of 253 +82/–70 ka. Sediments in the chamber are unlike deposits from other hominin findings in the Cradle of Humankind caves, and it is suggested this could indicate a different depositional regime and timing for the sediments and fossils.
Researchers have identified a new role for an epigenetic protein that could lead to a new understanding of how gene expression is regulated. The protein, called H3K36, is found in the DNA that makes up genes and was thought to control several processes that occur during gene expression, including splicing and cryptic transcription initiation. However, a new study by a team at Harvard Medical School found that H3K36 influences gene expression by modifying the structure of RNA after it has been made rather than by regulating transcriptional elongation, as previously thought. Understanding the precise role of H3K36 in gene expression could lead to new therapies for conditions in which gene expression is disrupted, such as cancer, researchers said.

Actin is a molecule released by dead cells that triggers sterile inflammation in vertebrates and adaptive immunity. Actin is also a DAMP (damage-associated molecular pattern) in invertebrates that lack DCs and adaptive immunity. Experiments with Drosophila melanogaster show that administration of actin triggers a response, characterized by selective induction of STAT target genes in the fat body through the cytokine Upd3 and its JAK/STAT-coupled receptor, Domeless, in a signalling cascade involving Shark, the Drosophila orthologue of Syk, Src42A, a Drosophila Src-family kinase, and Nox activity. The response likely evolved to clear cell debris and promote tissue repair but, if uncontrolled, it can lead to (aseptic) shock and in some cases, death. The immune system of Drosophila melanogaster has previously been studied in the context of infection.
Researchers used fruit flies as a model to investigate the role of the CrebB transcription factor in long-term memory formation. They created a conditional knockout allele of CrebB, allowing them to generate mutant neurons with high spatial and temporal precision. The results showed that CrebB is required for long-term memory formation in mushroom body circuit α/β and α’/β’ neurons, as well as MBON α3 neurons, but not in dopaminergic neurons. The study sheds light on the gene regulatory changes that occur within neurons during memory formation.
Recent research has demonstrated that T-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) - activated by low voltage - are regulated by intracellular Ca2+ concentrations. VGCCs have a unique function, acting both as a channel for calcium ions and as an intracellular secondary messenger. The control of these channels is vital in regulatory processes for cardiac activities and brain functions. The Ca2+-dependent modulation of L-type VGCCs is well-established, however, the modulation of T-type VGCC activity was unknown. The study performed electrophysiological experiments, demonstrating that Ca2+ concentration did impact T-type VGCCs’ activity, indicating this feedback mechanism link T-type VGCC cellular properties to their physiological roles. Overall, the study discovered that changes and localised increases in intracellular Ca2+ concentration near VGCC3 channels respond to this feedback mechanism. Further study is required to examine whether alteration of the feedback mechanism has pathophysiological consequences.
Researchers are using two-photon calcium imaging to study how the rat's barrel cortex codes and represents texture coarseness during artificial whisking against different surface coarseness levels. They found that layer 2-3 neurons respond differently to specific texture coarsenesses, with some neurons clustering together based on their preferred texture coarseness. This indicates that distinct neuronal subpopulations are mapped onto the barrel cortex for spatial representation of surface coarseness. The study also discovered a vertical columnar organization of texture coarseness preference in layer 2-3 neurons, suggesting that texture coarseness coding is carried out by high hierarchical processing of tactile information. Whisker movement is one of the most important senses used by rats to sense the external world, and they can locate and distinguish objects in their immediate sensory environment using their vibrissae (whiskers).
Researchers have developed a publicly available, cloud-based environment on Amazon's elastic cloud computing infrastructure to help address the limited resources available for computing clusters needed for the generation of high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures. The solution provides users with single particle cryo-EM software packages and the ability to create computing clusters with 16 to 480+ CPUs.

The processing of taste pheromones in higher order brain centers is not well understood. A novel gustatory circuit in Drosophila that underlies the detection of the anti-aphrodisiac pheromone (3R,11Z,19Z)-3-acetoxy-11,19-octacosadien-1-ol (CH503) has been discovered. Gr68a-expressing neurons on the forelegs of male flies exhibit a sexually dimorphic physiological response to the pheromone and relay information to the central brain via peptidergic neurons. The release of tachykinin from 8 to 10 cells within the subesophageal zone (SEZ) is required for the pheromone-triggered courtship suppression. CH503 is detected by gustatory receptors on the male foreleg and is perceived as an aversive tastant by males, but not females. The neural basis of pheromone detection provides a means for understanding how information from sensory stimuli is encoded and used to modulate complex behaviors such as mating and aggression.
A recent study has found that drug treatment of 3D cancer spheroids is likely to reflect in vivo therapeutic responses more accurately than traditional 2D adherent culture studies. This is significant because lung cancer, specifically adenocarcinomas, is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, and oncogenic driver mutations in the RTK/RAS pathway are found in over 75% of lung adenocarcinomas. Moreover, activating EGFR mutations are the major cause of lung cancer in never-smokers, with first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) showing enhanced effectiveness against tumors with L858R mutations or exon 19 deletions. However, resistance to first-generation EGFR-TKIs occurs in the majority of cases. 

To treat patients with T790M-mutated resistant tumors, the third generation EGFR-TKI osimertinib has been developed, but despite further enhancing survival of patients with EGFR-mutant tumors, resistance to it eventually emerges. To address this, the researchers used two distinct measures of pharmacologic synergy to demonstrate that SOS1 inhibition synergizes with EGFR-TKI treatment only in 3D spheroid cultures. By assessing the pharmacologic landscape of EGFR/RAS pathway inhibitors, the study shows that inhibition of proximal signaling is required to synergize with osimertinib, with combined EGFR and SOS1 inhibition synergizing to inhibit RAS effector signaling in 3D culture. The study concludes that EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells are more sensitive to either mutant EGFR or SOS1 inhibition in 3D spheroid culture compared to traditional 2D adherent conditions.
A new study has shed light on the mechanism by which transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) activates the SMAD1/5 pathway, and has determined that integrating signaling via SMAD2/3 and SMAD1/5 is essential for the full TGF-β-induced transcriptional programme and physiological responses. Specifically, the SMAD1/5 arm of TGF-β signaling requires both TGFBR1 and ACVR1, which phosphorylate SMAD1/5, with approximately a quarter of the TGF-β-induced transcriptome depending on SMAD1/5 signaling. Additionally, TGF-β-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition requires signaling via both the SMAD3 and SMAD1/5 pathways. TGF-β has been shown to promote the oncogenic potential of tumour cells, for example by driving epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and therefore improving our understanding of its mechanisms could enable the development of new therapies.
A new study has revealed the tissue-level coordination between the development and differentiation of the heart tube in vertebrates. During embryonic development, cardiac precursors differentiate to form a cardiac crescent, which eventually becomes an early heart tube. While some early contributions to the heart tube mainly give rise to the left ventricle, the right ventricle and most of the atria evolves from cardiac progenitors in a later SHF stage. The study used live imaging of mouse embryos to track the dynamics of cardiac field differentiation and found that differentiations occur in phases, with limited morphogenesis occurring between. In a third phase, precursor cell differentiation continues and contributes to SHF-derived regions and dorsal closure of the heart tube.
The document discusses how the context of the nucleosome impacts the signaling events at histone tails and the importance of studying histone binding in the context of the nucleosome. The histone tails have PTMs that are thought to be critical in regulating chromatin structure, and effector domains recognize them. However, studying effector domain/histone interactions have been challenging due to difficulties in crystalizing these domains in complex with modified nucleosomes, leading to studies using peptide fragments of histone tails. The study uses NMR spectroscopy to investigate the interaction of a PHD finger with the nucleosome, specifically, the BPTF PHD finger, and finds that in the context of the nucleosome, the PHD finger association with the methylated H3 tail is inhibited. The result demonstrates that the nucleosome context has a dramatic impact on signaling events at the histone tails, and highlights the importance of studying histone binding in the context of the nucleosome.
As people age, their ability to produce coherent speech declines, resulting in more tangential and off-topic speech. The cognitive factors underlying this decline are not well understood, but this study proposes that maintaining coherence relies on effective regulation of activated semantic knowledge and the selection of currently relevant representations for speech production. The study collected speech samples and measures of executive and semantic ability from young and older adults and found that semantic selection ability predicted coherence, as did the level of semantic knowledge and domain-general executive ability. These factors fully accounted for the age-related coherence deficit. The study suggests that maintaining coherence becomes more challenging as people age because they accumulate more knowledge but are less able to effectively regulate how it is activated and used.
Researchers have developed a new method for tracking the movement of mRNA molecules associated with ribosomes, allowing them to determine whether the mRNA is actively translating. The technique involves using MS2 stem loops to tag single beta-actin mRNAs co-moving with labelled ribosomes. The researchers found that highly translating mRNAs moved more slowly, indicating that ribosome load affects mRNA movement. Previous work had shown that mRNA sequences in the transcript's 3'UTR can be used to spatially control protein translation through zipcode sequences. The researchers developed their approach to provide a quantitative analysis of mRNA mobility features and follow the translational state of any given fluorescently tagged mRNA in a live cell. The approach could identify where ribosomes become engaged for local protein production and how spatial regulation of mRNA-protein interactions mediates cell directionality.
JCVI-syn3A is a minimal cell with a 543 kbp genome and 493 genes that can be used to study basic cellular function. A near-complete metabolic network of the minimal cell was assembled with 98% of enzymatic reactions supported by annotation or experiment. This model agreed with genome-scale in vivo transposon mutagenesis experiments and suggested specific open questions regarding the minimal genome of JCVI-syn3A. The model was able to yield specific hypotheses on gene functions and metabolic capabilities while providing suggestions for several further gene removals. JCVI-syn3A still contains many genes of generic or completely unclear function, including 30 essential genes. The metabolic reconstruction was based on the curated genome annotation, extensive experimental information from the literature on M. mycoides capri, and accompanying transposon insertion and proteomics data. The model features 338 reactions organized in nine subsystems, involving 304 metabolites, catalyzed by gene products of 155 genes, thus covering a third of the genes of JCVI-syn3A. The growth rate predicted by the model is provisional and comes with a degree of uncertainty.
The Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein and SCAR homology (WASH) complex subunit SWIP has been implicated in human intellectual disability, but its cellular etiology is unknown. Researchers used in vivo proximity proteomics to uncover the neuronal WASH proteome and found that disruption of the WASH complex leads to alterations in the neuronal endo-lysosomal axis, resulting in cognitive and motor impairments in mice. The SWIPP1019R mutation destabilizes the WASH complex and reveals significant perturbations in both endosomal and lysosomal pathways, causing endo-lysosomal disruption and neurodegeneration. Retrospective analysis of SWIPP1019R patients confirms similar movement deficits in humans. This study establishes the WASH complex's major endosomal trafficking role in the mouse brain and how its disruption leads to disease pathogenesis.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the brain is the master circadian clock that controls the body's rhythms of activity and rest. The strong communication between its neurons ensures consolidated rhythms that are resistant to outside disturbance. Scientists have discovered that a transcription factor, Lhx1, is necessary for coordinating this intercellular communication by regulating the expression of genes involved in this process. Mice lacking Lhx1 have reduced coupling factors, leading to a rapid phase shift under a jet lag paradigm and gradual deterioration of behavior rhythms under constant conditions. The study also identified various circadian and light-regulated protein-coding transcripts in the SCN that can be queried on a searchable web interface.
The TRAnsnuronal Control of Transcription (TRACT) technique has been developed to understand how neurons in brain circuits are connected. Neurons expressing an artificial ligand activate an artificial receptor on their synaptic partners, and upon ligand-receptor binding at synapses, a protein is cleaved, releasing a fragment that activates transcription in the synaptic partners. TRACT was tested on the Drosophila antennal lobe, a well-understood olfactory center, and potential new connections between neurons in the circadian circuit were discovered. TRACT could be a useful addition to mapping the connectivity of diverse neural circuits across many brain regions and organisms as recent research indicates that aberrant neuronal wiring may be the cause of several neurodevelopmental disorders.
A new study on 'Fluid shear stress set point and its regulation via junctional adhesion molecule-A and Proline Rich Tyrosine Kinase 2 in endothelial cells' which was originally published in eLife journal found that cells lining blood vessels, called endothelial cells, have a molecular “memory” of how much blood flow they experience, and that this remembers their historcal patterns of blood flow. It has been suggested that endothelial cells have a preferred level of fluid shear stress, or ‘set point’, that governs remodeling. The study suggests that there is a shear stress set point within the range of 10 and 20 dynes per cm2 for human umbilical vein endothelial cells, while lymphatics have a higher sensitivity to shear stress compared to venous cells. These differences are determined by differences in expression of VEGFR3, a protein involved in the shear stress mechanotransduction through the junctional complex.
Chondrocytes, the cells responsible for the production and maintenance of cartilage, respond to mechanical stimuli in order to maintain cartilage homeostasis. Mechanically gated ion channels are of functional importance in chondrocyte mechanotransduction and contribute to maintaining the balance of anabolic and catabolic processes. Researchers have used high-speed pressure clamp and elastomeric pillar arrays to apply distinct mechanical stimuli to primary murine chondrocytes in order to determine the separate mechanoelectrical transduction pathways in chondrocytes. The study demonstrates the presence of separate but overlapping mechanoelectrical transduction pathways in chondrocytes, and evidences that mechanically gated TRPV4 and PIEZO1 channels contribute to the currents activated when stimuli are applied at cell-substrate contact points. The study’s findings provide insights into how chondrocytes respond to mechanical stimuli and how sensitivity of the mechanotransduction pathways is modulated.
Combination therapies may be the key to long-term disease control for patients with solid tumours, according to a new study published in eLife. The study examined individual responses to the targeted drug Vemurafenib and with a mathematical model, identified the number of cross-resistant mutations in 68 melanoma tumours of 20 patients. This allowed the identification of a ‘tipping point’ where tumours begin to become unmanageable. Acknowledging the short period of effectiveness of many targeted therapies, the study aims to provide realistic expectations of drug efficacy and inform the creation of new cancer treatments.

Perturbations in neural circuits can provide insights into the neural correlates of behavior. In M71 transgenic mice, which have a "monoclonal nose," olfactory behaviors are altered due to massive perturbations in glomerular input patterns in the olfactory bulb. The study aimed to gain insights into how olfactory circuits can process perturbed inputs and analyzed odor-evoked responses of olfactory bulb mitral cells and interneurons. The results showed that inhibitory circuits in the olfactory bulb provide a mechanistic basis for the behavioral phenotypes of mice with a "monoclonal nose." Mitral cell responses in M71 transgenic mice were largely normal due to the remarkable capacity of olfactory circuits to normalize sensory input. Periglomerular cells mediate signal normalization through feedforward inhibition from the olfactory bulb. The findings highlight how substantially degraded odor input can be transformed to yield meaningful olfactory bulb output. The study provides insights into the link between odor-evoked neural activity and behavior, and how olfactory circuits can normalize sensory input through inhibitory circuits in the olfactory bulb.
The article discusses the ability of transfer RNA (tRNA) to self-assemble and replicate information autonomously via reversible hybridization under thermal oscillations. The self-selection of cross-complementary hairpins and interconnecting template-bound DNA hairpins led to an exponential replication that could encode and replicate binary sequences with high fidelity. The article also delves into the design and implementation of cooperatively replicating DNA strands using NUPACK and discusses the potential involvement of tRNA in molecular replication. The authors explore the possibility of DNA hydrogels as a way to select, assemble, and accumulate molecular components autonomously. Finally, the article presents experimental data on the cross-catalytic replication kinetics and the ability of the replicator to withstand consecutive dilutions.
Innate Lymphoid Cells (ILCs) are a recently identified group of lymphocytes that play a vital role in immune defence. However, the pathways underlying the development of ILCs have remained unclear. The transcription factor NFIL3 has been identified as essential in the development of a committed ILC precursor that gives rise to all ILC lineages. The precursor was identified as the αLP bone marrow population, which can differentiate into all known ILC lineages. Clonal differentiation assays reveal that CXCR6+ cells within the αLP population can differentiate into all ILC lineages, but not T- and B-cells. NFIL3 governs ILC development by directly regulating expression of the transcription factor TOX. These findings provide new insight into the defining role of NFIL3 in the differentiation of innate lymphoid cells.
Scientists have developed a new method to analyse the genetic structure of multiple species of microorganisms in a natural environment. The method, called meta3C, uses a metagenomic chromosome conformation capture approach to characterise individual genomes and their average organisation within a mix of organisms. It allows for the assembly, scaffolding and characterisation of the tridimensional organisation of unknown genomes in a single library. The method was tested on a mix of bacterial and yeast species and demonstrated its potential to provide insight into microbial species’ chromosome organisations while being a more efficient approach to metagenomic analysis.
New research has shown that microbes in the human gut play a crucial role in social interaction and neurodevelopment, as well as influencing brain function and behaviour. Scientists from the University of Zurich's Institute of Molecular Life Sciences found that the microbiota is a critical regulator of social interaction-induced gene expression in the amygdala, part of the brain which regulates social interaction. The link between autism and the microbiome is a rapidly growing area of research, with two recent mouse models showing that the microbiota is necessary for the expression of autistic-like symptoms in these models.
A study has identified KDM3A as the key factor in anoikis, a specific form of cell death that occurs when epithelial cells lose contact with the extracellular matrix. The study found that integrin signalling kept levels of the histone H3 lysine 9 mono- and di-demethylase KDM3A low in attached breast epithelial cells. When cells lost attachment, KDM3A expression increased, promoting anoikis through facilitating transcriptional activation of the genes BNIP3 and BNIP3L, which encode pro-apoptotic proteins. The result was more efficient cell death in breast epithelial cells, but defective KDM3A expression in human breast cancer cells and tumours. The study provides a potential new target for metastatic cancer treatment.
The role of DNA repair machinery in promoting longevity is poorly understood. DNA damage accumulates with age and unrepaired, can constantly activate the DNA damage response and accelerate aging. Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is one of the key regulators of DNA damage response. Here, the authors demonstrate that ATM-centered DNA damage response progressively declines with senescence and age, while a low dose of chloroquine (CQ) activates ATM and promotes DNA damage clearance. This rescues age-related metabolic shift and prolongs replicative lifespan. ATM phosphorylates SIRT6 deacetylase and prevents MDM2-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Extra copies of Sirt6 extend lifespan in Atm-/- mice and restores metabolic homeostasis. Moreover, treatment with CQ extends lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans and progeria mouse model with low DNA repair capacity. CQ ameliorates premature-aging features and provides therapeutic strategy for progeria and age-related metabolic diseases.
The article discusses the role of the metalloprotease Wss1 in DNA repair complexes and its regulation by posttranslational modifications such as sumoylation. In response to genotoxic stress, Wss1 forms a SUMO-specific ternary complex with the AAA ATPase Cdc48 and an adaptor, Doa1, and catalyzes SUMO chain extension through a newly recognized SUMO ligase activity. Wss1 is required for cell survival following UV irradiation, the smt3-331 mutation and Camptothecin-induced formation of covalent topoisomerase 1 complexes (Top1cc), and is involved in the clearance of sumoylated proteins through vacuolar degradation. The article also discusses the role of other posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation and ubiquitylation in the DNA damage response and the regulation of protein clearing from chromatin. The article concludes by suggesting a unique model of environmental switching of Wss1 from a ligase to a protease in response to DNA damage.
Researchers have discovered and validated a catalysis model for CRISPR-associated endonuclease Cas9 from Streptococcus pyogenes (SpyCas9) using computational and experimental approaches. The model demonstrates the HNH (endonuclease) domain is in a "cleavage-competent" conformation, using a catalytic triad of D839-H840-N863 for cleavage catalysis, rather than previously thought D861. The knowledge of the catalytic conformation of the HNH domain will help engineer Cas9 to ensure minimal off-target effects while retaining high gene-editing efficiency. The study will also advance future research to understand the structure-function relationships of Cas9 and facilitate the rational design of Cas9 for future variants. The findings prove that D861 is not critical for HNH domain-catalyzed tDNA cleavage, and the previous Cas9 complex structures of the HNH domain of DNA-bound Cas9 potentially represent a conformation that is incompetent for tDNA cleavage (cleavage-incompetent conformation with an inward-facing D861 as ‘pseudoactive state’).
This study investigates whether sequential reactivation of the hippocampal place cells along familiar paths while an animal pauses represents events occurring along the path. It is found that awake replay represents the trial type, consisting of path and subtask, in terms of neuronal firing timings and rates. This trial-type representation implies that not only "where and when" but also "what" information is contained in the replay. In addition, it is shown that during maze running, place cell activity in rodents conveys information on both familiar paths and accompanying subtasks. Finally, the study suggests that head direction is a behavioral sign indicating an expected future choice in rats.
The study investigates intertemporal decision-making in rats of different ages, specifically looking at the role of the basolateral amygdala (BLA) in intertemporal choice. Optogenetics were used to inactivate the BLA in young and aged rats during choices between small, immediate vs large, delayed food rewards. Results showed that BLA inactivation just prior to decisions attenuated impulsive choice in both young and aged rats, but inactivation during receipt of small, immediate reward only increased impulsive choice in young rats. BLA inactivation during the delay interval had no effect at either age. The study also discusses intertemporal choice and its associations with psychiatric diseases, changes across the lifespan, and the neural circuits underlying age-associated changes in intertemporal choice.
The Apelin receptor (Aplnr) plays an essential role in heart development by controlling migration of cardiac progenitors. The Aplnr modulates Nodal/TGFβ signaling, a pathway that is important for mesendoderm induction and migration, and loss of Aplnr function results in a decrease in Nodal target gene expression. Aplnr acts as a specific rheostat for the Nodal/TGFβ pathway during the earliest stages of cardiogenesis. There are two paralogues of the human APLNR gene in the zebrafish genome (aplnra and aplnrb) and the knock-out of aplnra using TALEN pairs targeted to its unique exon on chromosome 8 results in pericardial edema and reduced endodermal progenitors and cardiomyocyte numbers. The phenotype was similar to that of the injection of aplnra/b morpholinos, suggesting that Aplnr and Aplnrb have redundant roles in these early processes. Comparative microarray analysis of WT and aplnra/b morphants also revealed a reduction in a set of genes downstream of the Nodal signaling pathway, indicating a reduction in Nodal signaling in the absence of Aplnr function. The study suggests that Aplnr may regulate Nodal signaling levels during gastrulation to initiate proper heart formation.
NG2 cells, which are oligodendrocyte progenitors, receive a major synaptic input from interneurons in the developing neocortex. These precursors are believed to integrate cortical networks acting as sensors of neuronal activity. In the somatosensory cortex, NG2 cells form a transient and structured synaptic network with interneurons that follows its own rules of connectivity. Fast-spiking interneurons, highly connected to NG2 cells, target proximal subcellular domains containing GABAA receptors with γ2 subunits, while non-fast-spiking interneurons, poorly connected with these progenitors, target distal sites lacking this subunit. In the network, interneuron-NG2 cell connectivity maps exhibit a local spatial arrangement reflecting innervation only by the nearest interneurons. This microcircuit architecture shows a connectivity peak at PN10, which coincides with a switch to massive oligodendrocyte differentiation. Hence, GABAergic innervation of NG2 cells is temporally and spatially regulated from the subcellular to the network level in coordination with the onset of oligodendrogenesis.
The Toll-dependent patterning of the dorsoventral axis in Drosophila is well understood in gene regulatory networks, but its evolutionary origin is unknown. Toll is linked with pathogen defense and not patterning in insects outside of Drosophila, while in Drosophila, it is essential for axis formation and innate immunity. BMP signals are used to establish DV axis in other animals, and in fly Drosophila, BMP signaling plays a crucial role. Toll signaling may have evolved from a state of uniform Toll activity associated with protecting insect eggs against pathogens. Insects have different levels of Toll and BMP signaling, and Toll signaling is essential for mesoderm formation. The bug Oncopeltus fasciatus use Toll signaling only as a spatial cue to polarize a dynamic BMP signaling network that establishes a gradient responsible for patterning the cell fates along the DV axis. The key regulatory element of this network is the transcriptional repression of sog by BMP signaling. The interplay of BMP-dependent sog repression and Sog-dependent BMP transport generates a Turing instability. Toll's role in this system seems to be reduced. Knockdown of BMP signaling components results in completely ventralized or completely dorsalized embryos.
Reducing the expression of the metabolic transcription factor C/EBPβ-LIP can delay the development of age-related diseases and increase lifespan in female mice without reducing calorie intake, according to a study by a team of international researchers. Targeting C/EBPβ-LIP may offer new possibilities for treating age-related diseases and extending healthspan, the team found. Calorie restriction or inhibiting the mTORC1 pathway via rapamycin are two effective interventions to delay ageing and increase healthspan, but potentially dangerous side effects limit their use. The study’s findings suggest that a C/EBPβ defect may have positive effects on healthspan and lifespan.

Recent evidence suggests that pericytes, specialized cells on microvessels, play a crucial role in regulating microcirculation by contracting and relaxing in response to various stimuli. However, it has been difficult to detect the contractile protein, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), in pericytes due to rapid depolymerization during tissue fixation for immunolabeling. This article demonstrates that when filamentous-actin depolymerization is prevented by snap fixation or F-actin stabilizing agents, pericytes on high order retinal capillaries, including those in intermediate and deeper plexus, express α-SMA. The study suggests that the failure to detect α-SMA in pericytes may have resulted from poor fixation methods during previous studies, while the detection of α-SMA in pericytes significantly improves using snap or F-actin stabilizing agents, which highlights the importance of pericytes in regulating blood flow.
The response to pathogens involves complexity beyond transcription induced by immunostimulatory ligands. Pathogens interfere with almost every step of gene expression, making it unclear how cells initiate protective responses despite pathogen-mediated disruption of gene expression. A study using parallel RNAseq and ribosome profiling to characterise the response of macrophages to infection with the intracellular bacterial pathogen Legionella pneumophila reveals that mRNA superinduction is required for the inducible immune response to bacterial pathogens. The results support a model in which the majority of gene induction in response to pathogenic infections occurs at the level of mRNA induction.
Researchers have developed a cheminformatics pipeline that can predict receptor-odorant interactions to create a computationally predicted peripheral coding map of a large chemical space, which substantially improves the ability to predict and investigate peripheral olfactory coding and provides a powerful tool for the discovery of novel ligands for odorant receptors (Ors). The researchers used a comprehensive quantitative data set where measurements of responses of 24 Drosophila odorant receptors to a panel of 109 odorants that provides a rich resource for structure-activity-type analyses. They identified shared structural features from known ligands of individual receptors and used these features to screen in silico new candidate ligands from over 240,000 potential volatiles for several Ors in the Drosophila antenna. Functional experiments from nine Ors support a high success rate of 71% for the screen, resulting in identification of numerous new activators and inhibitors. The researchers used a Sequential-Forward-Selection (SFS) method to incrementally create unique optimized descriptor subsets for each Or from an initial combined set of 3424 descriptors from Dragon and Cerius2.
Glutaminase (GLS) is an enzyme that plays a key role in glutamine metabolism, which has been identified as a hallmark of cancer cells. GLS has two isoforms, GLS1 and GLS2, that have contrasting functions in tumorigenesis. GLS1 promotes tumorigenesis, while GLS2 exhibits a tumor-suppressive function. A recent study found that GLS2 binds to the small GTPase Rac1 and inhibits its interaction with Rac1 activators, which in turn inhibits Rac1 to suppress cancer metastasis. This function of GLS2 is independent of its glutaminase activity. Furthermore, decreased GLS2 expression is associated with enhanced metastasis in human cancer. GLS2 mediates p53’s function in metastasis suppression through inhibiting Rac1. These findings reveal a novel function and mechanism of GLS2 in suppressing metastasis and contributing to the contrasting functions of GLS1 and GLS2 in tumorigenesis.
Researchers studied genomic profiles of 17,879 tumors from patients with known outcomes across 16 types of cancer to understand the molecular alterations that underlie deadly malignancies. They found that mutations in almost all cancer driver genes contained little information on patient prognosis, but copy number alterations (CNAs) in these same driver genes harbor significant prognostic power. Focal CNAs are associated with worse outcomes than broad alterations, and CNAs in many driver genes remain prognostic when controlling for stage, grade, TP53 status, and total aneuploidy. Researchers identified robust prognostic biomarkers in specific cancer types through a meta-analysis across independent patient cohorts, and they demonstrate that a subset of these alterations also confer specific therapeutic vulnerabilities. Their analysis establishes a comprehensive resource for cancer biomarker identification and underscores the importance of gene copy number profiling in assessing clinical risk.
Researchers have discovered a new function for the Bcl-2 family protein Bid, which is critical to mitochondrial function under normal conditions. Loss of full-length Bid results in a deformation of mitochondrial membranes, leading to decreased respiration and increased stress-induced myocardial damage. Bid is also associated with myocardial infarction (MI), and decreased genetically determined Bid expression correlates with MI risk. Furthermore, carrier status for nonsynonymous variation in Bid’s membrane binding domain is associated with MI predisposition. Bid's role in homeostatic mitochondrial cristae reorganization is critical for efficient electron transfer and cytochrome c sequestration. The study provides an integrative approach that spans observations in tissue culture and mice to independent human genetics studies, linking Bid to human cardiac disease.
A new analytical toolbox has been presented for detecting and characterizing two quantitatively distinct mesenchymal migration modes, referred to as "Continuous" and "Discontinuous". The toolbox allows for the detection of heterogeneity in cell movement, membrane dynamics, cell-matrix adhesion status, and F-actin organization. The heterogeneity can be seen through spontaneous and adaptive responses to molecular targeting. This study provides proof that multiple mesenchymal migration modes exist and coexist under varying conditions, and each migratory mode responds differently to environmental changes. The analytical tools are available as a Matlab toolbox, the "Cell Adhesion and Migration Analysis Toolbox", along with raw quantitative data, sample image data, and explanatory documentation.
RNA-protein (RNP) granules vary in their material states, and the methods used to assemble them (solid or liquid) in living cells remains unknown. This study shows that mammalian cells show liquid-like behaviour when forming stress granules, but when looked at in budding yeast, stress granules adopt a more solid, protein-like state. It also suggests that the material state of RNP granules is flexible, and granule formation is not dependent on an amyloid-like aggregation process. Instead, the study proposes that the solid state observed in yeast stress granules is an adaptation to extreme environments, made possible by the presence of a powerful protein disaggregation machine. The study also investigates the underlying molecular mechanisms of stress-inducible RNP granules, which involves studying the role of prion-like proteins. It concludes that hexanediol, a chemical previously shown to affect nucleoporin-mediated transport across the nuclear pore, can be used to differentiate between amyloid-like and non-amyloid assemblies.
A study has uncovered a class of LRRK2 kinase substrates and revealed a novel regulatory mechanism of Rabs, which connects to Parkinson's disease (PD). Mutations in Park8 are the primary genetic cause of PD, with G2019S being the most common amino acid substitution that activates the kinase two to three-fold. The study employed phosphoproteomics, genetics and pharmacology to identify Rab GTPases as key LRRK2 substrates. Pathogenic LRRK2 variants mapping to different functional domains increase phosphorylation of Rabs, which decreases their affinity to regulatory proteins. Overall, the study identified direct kinase-substrate relationships and established direct, in vivo LRRK2 substrates.
The study reports on the genetic behavior of a gain-of-function mutation (brush) in the Cyclic nucleotide-gated channel (CNGC) family in Lotus japonicus, resulting in a leaky tetrameric channel. The brush mutation impaired root development and infection by nitrogen-fixing rhizobia, and overexpression of the cluster subunits was required to suppress the brush phenotype. The experiment revealed the mechanism by which quantitative competition between channel subunits for tetramer assembly can impact the phenotype of the mutation carrier. The study used various methods like yeast two-hybrid interaction assays, split ubiquitin interaction assays, and confocal microscopy for analysis.
Researchers have developed a new imaging technique, called primed Track, that enables automated, high-fidelity lineage tracing of mammalian pre-implantation development, which is essential for understanding early cell fate decisions. The technique involves using primed conversion of primed convertible fluorescent proteins to label individual nuclei and overcome challenges of rotational and spatial drift during early embryo development. The researchers also developed a computational pipeline to automatically segment, track, and trace individual cells using dual-color information from green and red labels, reducing data size and increasing lineage tracing fidelity. The technique offers advantages for long-term imaging experiments of sensitive specimens while decreasing photodamage from laser overexposure. The study identified primed convertible mEosFP as the optimal fluorescent protein variant for in vivo primed conversion in the mouse embryo followed by long-term imaging. The researchers also found that sparse labels can aid computational reorientation and automated lineage tracing in embryos with heavy rotational and spatial drift.
Researchers have developed a set of bioluminescence biosensors that monitor the inhibition of RAS-effector interactions in living cells, according to a study published in the journal eLife. The RAS family of proteins is key in many human cancers but adequate inhibitors have yet to be found. The biosensors are used to test RAS-targeting drugs, which can be used as front-line therapies for a range of cancer types if developed successfully.
A study has identified a genomic region called PTC2 that shows a large correlation with susceptibility to schistosomiasis in Biomphalaria glabrata snails, which are the intermediate hosts for schistosomes. PTC2 haplotypes are markedly diverse in both structure and sequence, including indels with genes containing multi-kilobases. RNA-Seq annotation indicates that most of the genes encode single-pass transmembrane proteins, which may mediate host-parasite interaction at the cell surface, offering promising targets for blocking the transmission of schistosomiasis. Mass drug administration for schistosomiasis treatment has not been wholly successful, and PTC2 offers a possibility to reduce transmission due to the identified host-parasite mechanism.
The PKD2-L1 channel subunit is found in restricted cellular spaces including primary cilia, and its regulation by external calcium has been investigated. It was found that the channel is partially selective to calcium ions, conducting them inwardly but being blocked by high internal concentrations, resulting in inactivation. This response rectifies calcium flow, allowing calcium to enter but not leave small compartments such as the cilium. PKD2-L1 forms a functional homotetrameric channel when expressed on the plasma membrane and dysregulation of its activity could lead to aberrant cytoplasmic calcium regulation, especially in smaller compartments such as cilia.
This study investigated the functional role of the cerebellum in active whisking in rodents. Patch clamp recordings were made from Purkinje cells in vivo to determine if cerebellar output encodes kinematic features of whisking, including phase and set point. Results showed that Purkinje cell activity changed strongly during whisking bouts, and on average, changes in simple spike rate coincided with or slightly preceded movement, indicating that synaptic drive responsible for these changes is predominantly of efferent (motor) rather than re-afferent (sensory) origin. Furthermore, on-going changes in simple spike rate provided an accurate linear read-out of whisker set point, indicating that single Purkinje cells accurately encode ongoing whisker movements via bidirectional modulation of simple spike firing rate in a linear manner. This study provides insights into the underlying computational principles of the cerebellar circuit and also establishes the presence of a whisking coordinate system in the cerebellum.
A new study presents biochemical data supporting the trans insertion model for complexin clamping which cross-links multiple pre-fusion SNARE complexes by functioning as a clamp on synaptic vesicles to ensure SNARE-mediated neurotransmitter release occurs tightly. A recent NMR study was unable to detect the clamping interaction of complexin and therefore questioned the previous interpretation of the fluorescent resonance energy transfer and isothermal titration calorimetry data. However, new findings have validated and supported previous interpretations about the trans insertion model for complexin clamping.
Researchers have used flow cytometric profiling of blood immune cell subsets to identify prostate cancer. A panel of eight phenotypic features were identified in the blood of asymptomatic men with PSA levels under 20 ng ml-1 that distinguished between benign disease and prostate cancer, using an Ensemble machine learning prediction model. The same model was extended to predict the D’Amico Risk Classification for patients with prostate cancer, without the need for additional clinical data. The method provides a simple blood test that has the potential to transform prostate cancer diagnostics and reduce the dependency on invasive biopsies.
Researchers have used thermography to examine how kissing bugs protect themselves from overheating during feeding. They found that during feeding, kissing bugs sequester and dissipate the excess heat in their heads while maintaining an abdominal temperature close to ambient. The study employed a functional-morphological approach, combining histology, µCT and X-ray-synchrotron imaging to shed light on the way these insects manage the flow of heat across their bodies. The research showed that kissing bugs possess anatomical specificities and adaptations that allow them to minimise the heat transfer to their abdomen, reducing the heat shock associated with feeding. The study proposed a 3D representation of the kissing bug's head, suggesting the existence of a countercurrent heat exchanger mechanism through which this species can protect itself against heat stress during blood-feeding. The study may inform future research into developing control strategies to prevent the spread of diseases caused by kissing bugs.
Scientists have investigated how walking fruit flies navigate complex odor plumes where the location and timing of odor packets are uncertain. Using a wind-tunnel walking assay, the researchers generated a spatiotemporally complex plume whose statistics approximate those of turbulent plumes near boundaries. The results showed that navigation was stochastic and did not rely on the continuous modulation of speed or orientation. Flies turned stochastically with stereotyped saccades, whose direction was biased upwind by the timing of prior odor encounters. Flies also used the timing of odor encounters to modulate the transition rates between walks and stops. The study suggests that navigation within spatiotemporally complex odor plumes is shaped by the sequence of encounters with individual odor packets.
Dpp is a morphogen that controls growth and specifies positional information in Drosophila wing precursors. The stripe of Dpp expressed along the anterior-posterior boundary forms a concentration gradient that controls the expression domains of target genes, which in turn specify the position of wing veins. The relationship between the spatio-temporal profile of Dpp signaling and growth has been the subject of debate, but recent experiments have shown that the stripe of Dpp is essential for wing growth. Deletion of the central stripe of Dpp is deleterious to growth, and Dpp originating from outside the pouch does not compensate. It is concluded that Dpp must be continuously produced at least until 96 hours after egg laying for proper growth.
The role of CCR2+ inflammatory monocytes (IMs) in CD4 T cell response to tuberculosis (TB) infection has been studied. The study showed that IMs are important in delivering TB to pulmonary lymph nodes and promoting CD4 T cell responses. However, they do not directly prime CD4 T cells, and it is the classical dendritic cells (cDCs) that induce proliferation of Mtb-specific CD4 T cells. This information suggests that IMs serve as carriers of Mtb, delivering live bacteria to the lymph nodes, and enabling but not directly priming CD4 T cells. The study also investigated the role of CCR2 in the trafficking of IMs into infected lungs or from the sites of lung infection to draining lymph nodes and revealed that CCR2-signaling does not contribute to trafficking of IMs between these sites.
This document discusses the role of coregulators in androgen activation of the androgen receptor (AR) in metastatic prostate cancer. The AR is the main driver of prostate cancer progression and is targeted in standard treatment, but resistance often develops. Understanding the molecular regulation of the AR is important for developing alternative therapeutic targets. The researchers found that each of 18 clinically relevant coregulators mediates androgen-responsiveness of 0-57% genes and can act as a coactivator or corepressor in a gene-specific manner. They identified a WDR77-dependent transcriptional mechanism in which AR and p53 control cell cycle progression, providing a rationale for a coregulator-dependent alternative target for therapy. The study used an integrated approach to define the contribution of coregulators to androgen-responsiveness of 452 AR target genes, revealing gene-specific preference and context-dependency in coregulator regulation of AR activity. The study provides insights that could lead to more specific inhibition of AR activity and alternative therapeutic targets for metastatic prostate cancer.
Researchers have identified a protein called MELK which is overexpressed in basal-like breast cancer (BBC), an aggressive subtype of the disease which is usually difficult to treat due to the lack of estrogen and progesterone receptors. MELK is a kinase which is essential for BBC, largely due to being regulated by the FoxM1 transcription factor, and the researchers believe the protein could make a promising therapeutic target for BBC, which currently falls within the triple-negative classification. The researchers used an in vivo tumorigenesis screen to identify potential oncogenic events and used the resulting data to examine MELK's suitability as a target.
TLR13, a Toll-like receptor, has been discovered to detect the 23S ribosomal RNA of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. A specific 13 nucleotide sequence near the active site of 23S rRNA is necessary and sufficient to trigger the TLR13-dependent interleukin-1β production, and single point mutations within this sequence destroy the ability of the 23S rRNA to stimulate the TLR13 pathway. TLR13 is the first nucleic acid sensing pattern recognition receptor to recognise a specific RNA sequence, and its ligands have previously been unknown. The study also investigated the mechanisms behind RNA detection and IL-1β induction in mouse macrophages, finding that TLR13, MyD88 and Unc93b1 were involved, along with ssRNA from a gram-positive commensal bacterium Lactobacillus salivarius. The study also found that 23S rRNA from both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria strongly stimulates IL-1β production. The optimal immune stimulatory RNA sequence resides in 2054-2066 of 23S rRNA (ACGGAAAGACCCC), which has been named ISR23.
This study explores whether an aggressive (high dose) or more moderate (lower dose) treatment of individuals will most limit the emergence and spread of resistant bacteria. The authors show how the extent of effective competition between resistant and sensitive pathogens within a host is a key determinant of which treatment strategy will perform best at the individual level. They also extend their analysis to the community level and find that the magnitude of effective competition between resistant and sensitive strains determines whether an aggressive approach or moderate approach minimizes the burden of resistance in the population. The models presented in this study provide insight into the debate about aggressive and moderate approaches for antimicrobial treatment.
Researchers have identified the mechanism by which the Sema/Plexin signaling pathway inhibits synapse formation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Specifically, they found that the small GTPase Rap2 and its effector TNIK function downstream of the Plexin protein to restrict presynaptic assembly and form tiled synaptic innervation. The cycling between GTP- and GDP-forms of Rap2 is critical to regulate synapse patterning. The study provides insight into the intracellular mechanisms through which Sema/Plexin signaling inhibits synapse formation and contributes to the formation of proper synapse patterning in vivo.
The protein BubR1 is a key component of the spindle assembly checkpoint and mutations that reduce its abundance can cause aneuploidization and tumorigenesis, while overexpression protects against these. However, how supranormal BubR1 expression exerts these beneficial physiological impacts is poorly understood. Researchers used transgenic mice to explore the role of the amino-terminal and internal Cdc20-binding domains of BubR1 in preventing aneuploidy and safeguarding against cancer, and found that BubR1 lacking the internal Cdc20-binding domain provided protection against aneuploidy and cancer, coinciding with improved microtubule-kinetochore attachment error correction and spindle assembly checkpoint activity. Thus, while under- or overexpression of most mitotic regulators impairs chromosome segregation fidelity, certain manipulations of BubR1 can positively impact this process and therefore be therapeutically exploited.
Zebra finches, a gregarious, non-territorial species, exhibit monogamy, leading researchers to investigate how the species can sustain both social cohesion and breeding boundaries. Researchers found that a bird's brain is activated by both social interactions and sexual stimuli, indicating that song-triggered dopaminergic activation serves a dual function in promoting social cohesion among males and selective sexual relations among females. The team conducted experiments using a novel approach to assess song reinforcement, which they likened to drug addiction experiments involving rodents, and found that zebra finches have sexually dimorphic striatal responses to songs -- a weaker effect, if any, was observed in unmated females, while unmated males persistently exchanged mild punishments in return for songs. The study suggests that a co-evolution of sexually dimorphic reinforcement systems can explain the co-existence of gregariousness and monogamy in zebra finches.
The CIDE-N protein Drep-2 has been found to be a novel synaptic protein important for learning and behavioral adaptation in Drosophila. It was found at synapses throughout the Drosophila brain and was strongly enriched at mushroom body input synapses. It was required within Kenyon cells for normal olfactory short- and intermediate-term memory. Drep-2 colocalized with metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). Mutants lacking drep-2 showed normal exterior morphology but were shorter-lived than the isogenic controls. While a function of the protein related to apoptosis cannot be excluded, we decided rather to examine the synaptic functions of Drep-2. In order to narrow down a potential site of action of the protein, Drep-2 expression in the adult CNS was also examined in more detail. The protein has been found to be enriched at KC postsynapses.
A study has found that three mammalian lineages - cetaceans (dolphins and whales), elephants and mastodons, and Old World fruit bats - have lost the key enzyme required for ketone body biosynthesis. This is surprising considering ketone bodies are an important fuel for the brain during fasting and neonatal development. Many of these species have large brains and signs of intelligent behaviour, but they have developed alternative strategies to fuel their brains during fasting. The loss of HMGCS2 (the key enzyme) preceded brain size expansion in toothed whales and elephants, suggesting that ketogenesis is not a universal precondition for the evolution of large mammalian brains. The study shows that periods of fasting are a common event for many animals and rely on stored sources of energy such as glucose in the form of glycogen and fatty acids. Ketone bodies become an alternative fuel source that is important for many mammals to survive episodes of fasting or starvation. 

A recent study has revealed that SUMO protein modification plays an essential role in regulating meiotic chromosome metabolism to produce haploid gametes. The study identified 2747 conjugation sites in 775 targets in budding yeast, showing that SUMOylation regulates all levels of chromosome organization and each step of meiotic prophase I. The research implies that SUMO plays diverse and unanticipated roles in regulating meiotic chromosome metabolism. The study also found that SUMO modifies ubiquitin, forming hybrid oligomers with potential to modulate ubiquitin signaling. Overall, the research identified a diverse and dynamic meiotic SUMO-modified proteome and provides a rich resource toward a mechanistic understanding of how SUMO regulates the complex events of meiosis.
A study of 946 youths aged 8-23 found that the energy required to activate the fronto-parietal system critical for executive function declined with age, suggesting that structural brain networks become optimized during adolescence to minimize the energetic costs of transitions to activation states necessary for executive function. The energetic requirements of the cingulate cortex were negatively correlated with executive performance, and partially mediated the development of executive performance with age. The study used diffusion imaging and network control theory to model how structural brain networks facilitate state transitions from an initial baseline state to the target state, and estimated the regional energetic cost required for the brain to transition from the baseline to the fronto-parietal activation target state.
Premature fusion of the cranial sutures, or craniosynostosis, which affects 1 in 2000 newborns, is treated surgically in infancy to avoid neurologic complications. In search of mutations contributing to common non-syndromic midline craniosynostosis, researchers performed exome sequencing on 132 parent-offspring trios and 59 additional probands. Thirteen probands had damaging de novo or rare transmitted mutations in SMAD6, an inhibitor of BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation. SMAD6 mutations showed incomplete penetrance, but genotypes of a common variant near BMP2 that is strongly associated with midline craniosynostosis explained almost all phenotypic variation in these kinships. This epistatic interaction of rare and common variants defines the most frequent cause of midline craniosynostosis and has implications for the genetic basis of other types of diseases.
Serotonin receptors (5-HT3AR) play a significant role in regulating gut movement and are the principal target of setrons, a class of drugs used to manage nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy and radiation. The study presents high-resolution cryo-EM structures of full-length 5-HT3AR in complex with palonosetron, ondansetron, and alosetron. The study shows setron-binding poses and their inhibitory mechanisms and the varying degrees of conformational change in the setron-5-HT3AR structures. The study reveals a distinct interaction fingerprint between the various setrons and binding-pocket residues that may underlie their diverse affinities. The isoquinoline derivative palonosetron is highly selective for 5-HT3AR receptors and is shown to have a longer half-life, improved bioavailability, and efficacy. Setrons are also used to treat gastrointestinal disorders, inflammatory, neurological, and psychiatric disorders such as migraine, drug abuse, schizophrenia, and cognitive disorders. Structure insights into setron-binding poses came initially from crystal structures of the acetylcholine binding protein (AChBP), bound to several setrons. While some of the basic principles of setron-binding are now clear, there is limited understanding of differing pharmacodynamics among setrons and the associated clinical relevance.
The right-skewed lognormal distribution of incubation periods for diseases like typhoid, polio, measles, leukemia, and others has puzzled scientists for over six decades. A new theory has emerged, based on evolutionary dynamics on graphs. The theory proposes that instead of heterogeneity, which was previously thought to be the reason for this distribution, the skewness stems from stochastic mechanisms associated with two classic problems in probability theory: the coupon collector and the random walk. Using simple models of a mutant or pathogen invading a network-structured population of healthy cells, the theory shows that skewed distributions of incubation periods emerge for a wide range of assumptions about invader fitness, competition dynamics, and network structure. Unlike previous explanations that rely on heterogeneity, this theory shows that even homogeneous populations can produce a wide variety of incubation times.
Researchers have discovered that the arrangement of mechanotransduction sites at heminodes is a key structural feature that accounts in part for afferent firing properties. The study examined slowly adapting type I (SAI) afferents in mouse skin and found a high degree of variability in touch-evoked firing and peripheral anatomy. Structural diversity was observed in SAI-afferent end organs, particularly in the abundance of Merkel cell-neurite complexes. The study suggests that spikes initiate at heminodes, rather than in SAI-afferent terminals, indicating that the multi-branching configuration of tactile afferents has multiple spike initiation zones. The research sheds light on the mechanisms of touch sensation and could have implications for the development of new prosthetics and touch interfaces.
A study on Arabidopsis plants has found that regions of the genome with heterozygosity (having two different versions of a gene) show higher crossover recombination rates when next to homozygous (having two identical versions of a gene) regions, while the homozygous regions show reduced rates. The researchers generated fluorescent crossover reporters and crossbred them with Arabidopsis lines carrying diverse accessions to obtain F1 heterozygotes. They did not find any trans modifiers (loci encoding diffusible molecules that control recombination on other chromosomes) in these crosses, but observed a cis modification effect caused by heterozygosity. To investigate the phenomenon, the researchers conducted analysis in fancm, zip4, and fancm zip4 mutants that altered the balance of interfering and non-interfering crossover repair, and found that the remodelling of crossovers across heterozygosity/homozygosity junctions is dependent on interference.
New research indicates that PTSD may arise from anomalous gating of attention during learning. It is said that neuroimaging, a loss-learning task, and a computational model-based approach assessed the mechanistic hypothesis that overreactions to stimuli in PTSD arise from heightened attention during learning. The research suggests that increased attention-based learning may underlie aspects of PTSD and suggest potential neuromechanistic treatment targets.
Perfringolysin O (PFO) is a protein that undergoes a significant reduction in height during the transition from the membrane-assembled prepore to the membrane-inserted pore. A study conducted shows that targeted application of compressive forces can catalyse this conformational change in individual PFO complexes trapped at the prepore stage, recapitulating this critical step of the spontaneous process. The results suggest that intra-protein stresses are the driving force of the structural coordination between the D2 and D3 domains and, ultimately, the catalyst of the collapse of the D2 domain. Moreover, single molecule compression is shown to be an important tool to investigate conformational transitions in membrane proteins.
Scientists have sequenced the genome of the tiny tomato russet mite, which is a pest on tomato and can suppress the host's natural resistance. The genome is the smallest yet reported for any arthropod, with few transposable elements, tiny intergenic regions and few introns, indicating genomic features associated with the mite's minute size and lifestyle. The mite's extreme size has resulted in altered reproductive behaviour, with males depositing sperm that is subsequently picked up by females, rather than directly inseminating them. The genome also sheds light on mechanisms of extreme metazoan genome reduction and the interplay between gene content and the lifestyle of small herbivores that manipulate their environment.
Researchers monitored the brain activity of rats as they encountered social and fearful stimuli. They found that social encounters were associated with an increase in rhythmic activity in the high theta range (7-10 Hz) in all brain regions, reflecting a brain state of social arousal. Conversely, a fearful stimulus induced rhythmicity in the low theta range (3-7Hz) in the same network of brain regions. The researchers suggest that the distinct types of rhythmicity, reflecting distinct arousal states, support different modes of communication between brain areas, with potential implications for cognitive processes such as memory acquisition and recall.
The Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) works by interacting with chromatin at GR binding sites (GBSs) throughout the genome, and this study identifies three classes of GBSs with distinct epigenetic characteristics. The study also reveals that BRG1 is required for a proper and robust transcriptional hormone response, and knockdown of BRG1 blocks recruitment of pioneer factors FOXA1 and GATA3 to GBSs. Furthermore, GR interaction with FOXA1 and GATA3 binding sites was restricted to sites pre-bound by BRG1. The study concludes that BRG1 establishes specialized chromatin environments that define multiple classes of GBS, predicting that GR and other transcriptional activators function via multiple distinct chromatin-based mechanisms to modulate the transcriptional response.
This study explores the unique firing behavior of irregular-spiking (IS) interneurons in the cerebral cortex of mice. These neurons show intrinsic variability in their spike timing, which allows for synchronization with other IS cells via gap junctions. The researchers use patch-clamp recordings and computational modeling to show that this irregular firing is generated by a nonlinear interaction of voltage-dependent sodium and fast-inactivating potassium channels, amplifying channel noise. This active irregularity helps IS cells synchronize with each other at gamma range frequencies while resisting synchronization to lower input frequencies. The researchers also explore the functional consequences of this irregularity in an oscillating cortical network and suggest that IS neurons have a prominent role in gating local cortical gamma oscillations.
Researchers have used a chemical-genetic approach to study the role of acetylcholine (ACh) in the modulation of ventral tegmental area (VTA) circuits and reward-related behaviors through beta2-containing nicotinic ACh receptors (nAChRs) in mice. They optically manipulated nicotinic neurotransmission in VTA neurons and found that the ACh tone fine-tunes the firing properties of VTA dopamine neurons. This control was achieved through β2-containing ( β2* ) nAChRs. They also demonstrated that locally photo-antagonizing nicotinic transmission in the VTA was sufficient to reversibly switch nicotine reinforcement on and off. This technology could help unravel the physiological functions of nAChRs and assist in the design of novel therapies for neuropsychiatric disorders.
The soluble isoform of the leptin receptor (sOb-R) regulates leptin bioactivity and is reduced in diet-induced obesity (DIO) leading to hyperleptinemia and leptin resistance. The endocannabinoid (eCB)/CB1R system regulates sOb-R levels and hepatic leptin resistance via CHOP. The liver is an important target for leptin as it regulates whole-body energy homeostasis. Defects in leptin action lead to dysregulated energy balance, impair hepatic function, and lead to hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and dyslipidemia. The eCB/CB1R system is highly overactive during obesity and contributes to the development of metabolic syndrome, including leptin resistance. Peripheral CB1R blockade failed to reverse DIO-induced reduction of sOb-R levels in mice lacking CHOP, whereas direct activation of CB1R in wild-type hepatocytes reduced sOb-R levels in a CHOP-dependent manner. Our findings highlight a novel molecular aspect of the hepatic eCB/CB1R system in the regulation of sOb-R levels via CHOP.
A study has been undertaken to investigate the cohabiting properties of myosin V and VI and determine their collective function in cells. The study also sought to determine the mechanism of sorting of membrane cargo using equally matched antagonistic motors, and therefore sorted scaffolds displaying solely unidirectional movement, which were modulated by both actin architecture and structural properties. Furthermore, the directional flux can be tuned by the number of myosin V and VI motors on each scaffold, and it is suggested that the ratio of motor stall forces determines the competitive outcomes. The study highlights the efficacy of precisely modulating the relative number of engagement sites for each motor type to enable the sorting of membrane cargo, demonstrating an elegant mechanism using equally matched antagonistic motors.
Researchers have shown that neurons in the trigeminal ganglion (Vg) of rats encode the mechanics of object contact more than the kinematics. While previous studies have focused on the kinematic (geometric) variables of contact, like the radial distance and angular position, the new study developed a technique to decouple kinematics from mechanics and found that Vg neurons more directly encode mechanical signals, such as forces and moments, when the whisker is deflected in a decoupled stimulus space. The researchers used models of whisker bending to quantify the mechanical signals at the base of the whisker and simultaneously monitored whisker kinematics and recorded single Vg units in both anesthetized rats and awake, body-restrained rats.
This study explores the causes of high mutational variance and fast phenotypic evolution in organisms, using the example of the vulva precursor cells in Caenorhabditis nematodes. The study finds that a broad mutational target size, rather than a high mutation rate at specific loci, is the cause of the high mutational variance and fast evolution of P3.p cell fate. The study uses mutation accumulation lines to identify causal mutations and concludes that the fast evolutionary rate of change in P3.p cell fate may be explained by a broad mutational target for this trait.
The study investigated how the cerebellum processes vestibular signals from different sources. Primary afferents carry signals from single vestibular end organs, while secondary afferents from vestibular nucleus carry integrated signals. The study focused on vestibular projections to ON and OFF classes of unipolar brush cells (UBCs), which transform single mossy fiber signals into long-lasting excitation or inhibition, respectively, and impact the activity of ensembles of granule cells. The researchers found that a specialized subset of primary afferents contacts ON UBCs but not OFF UBCs, while secondary afferents contact both subtypes. The study also traced vestibular cerebellar mossy fibers back to their primary and secondary sources and forward to target neurons in the cerebellum. The study found that most primary afferents to lobe X are dimorphic VG fibers from the semicircular canals and that these fibers contact ON UBCs.
Researchers have discovered that the switching of bi-orientated sister kinetochores during the congression of chromosomes to the spindle equator involves both the leading and trailing kinetochores, instead of just the leading kinetochore, ruling out the involvement of a tension sensor as previously believed. Clocks set the intrinsic-switching time of the two kinetochore-attached microtubule fibres, with the centromeric spring tension operating as a feedback to slow or accelerate the clocks. An improved kinetochore-tracking procedure and a Bayesian switching point inference algorithm were developed to analyse information at high-resolution about coherent runs and switching events. Sister kinetochores undergo quasi-periodic oscillations normal to the metaphase plate with a half-period of 35 seconds.
Neuronal clocks regulate gene expression in peripheral metabolic tissue through neuropeptide signaling, according to a paper published in the journal eLife. Researchers found that rhythmic expression of the cytochrome P450 transcripts, an important detoxification pathway, in the Drosophila fat body, depends on the presence of clocks in neurons expressing neuropeptide F (NPF). The study identified a conserved role for NPF/Npy neuropeptides in the circadian system, which could help to maintain metabolic homeostasis in the body.
The process of wound healing involves several phases including inflammation, proliferation of stem cells and tissue remodeling. The interplay between diverse cell types in the skin is crucial for mobilizing local stem cell pools to promote tissue regeneration and repair. The study used the ablation of epidermal caspase-8 as a model to analyze the signaling components responsible for epithelial stem cell proliferation. The results showed that IL-1α and IL-7 secreted from keratinocytes worked together to expand the activated population of resident epidermal γδT-cells which then promoted the proliferation of hair follicle stem cells. IL-1α-dependent stimulation of dermal fibroblasts optimally stimulated interfollicular stem cell proliferation. The study highlights the importance of understanding the regulation of stem cell proliferation within the context of an organ which can advance the goal of enhancing the regenerative process or tempering chronic wound-healing response diseases.
This article discusses how cortical oscillations - specifically coupled theta-gamma oscillations - could contribute to the multiscale sensory analysis of speech. The article outlines how the physical complexity of biological and environmental signals can pose a fundamental problem to sensory systems, as these signals are made up of different rhythmic streams. In the case of speech, different rhythms index different granularities of linguistic representations. Before meaning can be extracted from continuous speech, two critical pre-processing steps need to be carried out: a de-multiplexing step and a parsing step. The article discusses how cortical oscillations could assist with this process. The article then goes on to detail a neural microcircuit model that was used to examine how a biophysically inspired model of coupled theta and gamma neural oscillations can process continuous speech.
The document discusses loop extrusion by SMC complexes, such as condensin and cohesin, that organize chromatin in cells. Two-sided loop extrusion reproduces key features of chromatin organization, but in vitro single-molecule experiments confirm that yeast condensins extrude loops in a 'one-sided' manner. The document investigates whether one-sided loop extrusion can compact mitotic chromosomes, organize interphase domains, and juxtapose bacterial chromosomal arms, which two-sided loop extruders can do. The document finds that pure one-sided loop extrusion fails to capture most of the in vivo phenomenology, but simple variants of the one-sided model can restore the emergent features of chromatin organization observed in experiments. The one-sided extrusion fails to reliably bring CTCF barriers together and thus cannot generate micro-C maps but can be remedied by introducing two-sided LEFs to close gaps or undergo frequent stochastic switches in translocation direction.
The study examines stop codon readthrough (SCR) in mammals and investigates the potential therapeutic uses for treating premature termination codons (PTCs) found in critical genes. The researchers treated mammalian cells with aminoglycosides and performed ribosome profiling to study SCR in vivo. They find that aminoglycosides stimulate readthrough of normal termination codons (NTCs) and PTCs by influencing the likelihood of SCR. The study suggests that targeting critical stop codons for readthrough may be achievable without disrupting general translation termination. The researchers also find that G418-induced miscoding alters gene expression with substantial effects on certain genes. Overall, the study contributes to a better understanding of the rules dictating readthrough efficiencies of stop codons and the potential therapeutic benefits of stop codon readthrough in treating genetic disorders caused by PTCs.
Researchers have identified the lateral contacts between spikes on hantaviruses that are critical in directing entry into new cells. The study, which was published in PLOS Pathogens, reveals that disulfide bonds can be engineered to cross-link spikes, and that disrupting the dimer interface affects particle assembly and overall spike stability. The authors also found that the spikes display a temperature-dependent dynamic behaviour at neutral pH, alternating between “open” and “closed” forms.
The mechanism of oocyte transfer from the ovary to the oviduct for fertilisation and successful reproduction remains poorly known. Recent research using Drosophila models has helped to uncover the role of glands in the female reproductive tract, including how they are needed for ovulation and to promote sperm storage. During development of the cell system, the Notch signalling pathway interferes and reduces total secretory cell numbers which subsequently block ovulation. To permit more successful fertilisation, the oviduct must extensively interact with the ovary for better egg transport and to mediate the uptake of water and eggshell cross-linking. The reproductive tract signals to the ovary using glandular secretions, with adult female reproductive glands needing secretion of canonical proteins to store sperm, while ovulation needs non-canonical glandular secretion. This has revealed important insights into how ovarian cancer may originate following an extended number of ovulatory cycles. These findings could shed light on issues with human fertility and infertility treatments.
Researchers have identified two enzymes, UBE2G1 and UBE2D3, that cooperatively promote the degradation of proteins targeted by cereblon modulating agents (CMs), a class of drug that has been successful in treating multiple myeloma. These enzymes promote the K48-linked polyubiquitination of specific neomorphic substrates, including IKZF1 and IKZF3, which are critical for cancer cell survival. Blocking UBE2G1 reduces the ubiquitination of neomorphic substrates and the antitumor activity of CMs, making the drug ineffective. This research sheds light on potential issues with drug
A new study published in Nature Communications reveals that human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) uses inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6), a protein found in human cells, to control the stability of its capsid and uncoating, in a manner similar to picornavirus pocket factors. The researchers found that once IP6 was introduced, capsid stability increased by almost 10°C and newly synthesised HIV DNA was protected from nucleic acid sensors and nucleases in the cytosol. Encapsidated reverse transcription assays revealed that, once stabilised, the accumulation of new viral DNA inside the capsid increased by over 100-fold. On average, over 300 IP6 molecules were selectively packaged per infectious virion.
This article presents cryo-EM structures of myosin VI bound to F-actin in the rigor and Mg-ADP states, revealing structural transitions during the motor's mechanochemical cycle. The study provides the first high-resolution structure of any myosin in the ADP state and proposes a structural mechanism for the regulation of ADP affinity. Additionally, the study observes reciprocal rearrangements in actin and myosin during the ADP to rigor transition, suggesting a role for actin structural plasticity in myosin VI force generation. The article discusses the critical role of myosin motor proteins in cell function and human health and highlights the importance of understanding their specific mechanisms to develop potential therapeutics.
Cotransins, a class of cyclic peptides that bind to Sec61α, a protein involved in membrane protein biogenesis, were used to study the mechanism of transmembrane domain (TMD) integration. Cotransin was found to block TMD integration, causing the TMD to dock against the cytosolic tip of the Sec61 lateral gate. The study found that escape from cotransin-arrest depends on cotransin concentration and the properties of the TMD such as TMD/lateral gate interactions and biophysical properties. The study also identified multiple point mutations in the lumenal plug region of Sec61α that confer dominant resistance to cotransin binding.
The protein Kip2, found in budding yeast, is a microtubule polymerase and catastrophe inhibitor. Kip2 uses feedback loops, created by walking to the ends of longer microtubules to inhibit catastrophe and reinforce growth, in order to regulate microtubule length. This positive feedback mechanism, which is commonly used in biochemical pathways, may have potential applications in mechanical signaling pathways. Tests in vitro revealed that Kip2 increased the length of polymerized microtubules by almost 3-fold whilst reducing the frequency of catastrophes by almost 10-fold, thus promoting microtubule growth. Furthermore, Kip2 affected microtubule dynamics at physiologically relevant concentrations.
A research team has developed a FRET sensor (ABACUS) which enables monitoring of ABA (a terpenoid plant hormone) levels in live plants with high spatial and temporal resolution, shedding new light on how the hormone contributes to the plant's response to periods of drought. The use of ABACUS could help understand the diverse roles of ABA in multiple tissues and identify missing components. ABACUS can be used to study ABA responses in mutants and quantitatively monitor its translocation and regulation.
Researchers have proposed a theory suggesting that the organisation of grid cells in the brain represents a hierarchical code for space, which saves the number of neurons needed to encode a location within a certain distance. The theory explains the measured grid structure in rodents and predicts that the ideal grid fields' ratio should be √e and lie between 1.4 and 1.7 for realistic neurons, while the scale ratio should change modestly within and between animals. The grid scales' geometric progression and organization in one and three dimensions are further predicted.
Researchers have created an age predictor for mice based on DNA methylation levels at three CG dinucleotides (CpGs) in the genes Prima1, Hsf4 and Kcns1. The predictor can estimate chronological mouse age precisely from these sites, and proved to be an effective tool for simple, cost-effective biomarkers in large scale intervention studies with mice. The tests also identified that DBA2 mice had accelerated age, in alignment with their shorter life expectancy compared to their C57BL6 counterparts. 
During cortical development, the identity of long-distance projection neurons is established by the expression of molecular determinants, however, the mechanisms by which neurons acquire their final properties during postnatal stages are not well understood. A new study has shown that co-expression of Ctip2 and Satb2 in postnatal mice creates two subclasses of neurons, one projecting to the contralateral cortex and the other to the brainstem, suggesting that Ctip2/Satb2 co-expression may refine their properties rather than determine their identity. The transcriptional adaptor Lmo4 is shown to drive this maturation program through modulation of epigenetic mechanisms in a time and area-specific manner. The study suggests that common molecular pathways may regulate different specification programs during postnatal maturation and refinement of functionally distinct classes of neocortical neurons.
The SNAREs SNAP25 and SNAP23 are initially cytosolic proteins that become stably attached to the cell membrane through palmitoylation of cysteine residues. The mechanism underlying initial plasma membrane contact by SNARE proteins is electrostatic anchoring between basic amino acid residues and acidic lipids such as phosphoinositides. The minimal domain necessary for SNAP25 plasma membrane targeting has been mapped to amino acids 85-120. A small accumulation of positive charges close to the cysteine cluster constitutes the main driving force for initial plasma membrane association. SNAP23 carries three positive charges in the cysteine-rich region, and palmitoylation is also required for stable attachment of SNAP23.
Researchers have used simultaneous recordings from the dorsal premotor and primary motor cortexes of monkeys, brain areas central to preparing and producing movements that effect decisions, to study the internal events that occur when making free choices. The experiment used a novel decision task to achieve this, where the monkeys were encouraged to decide quickly but often had time to change their minds if desired. By studying neural activity during free choices, the researchers found that monkeys made rapid, unwavering choices, but also observed ‘changes of mind’, where the neural state initially reflected one choice before changing to reflect the final choice, and momentary ‘indecision’, where the monkey delayed forming any clear motor plan. These findings reveal the complicated decision process that occurs within the brain during free choice.
Hox proteins play an important role in regulating embryonic development, but their specific molecular modes of action are poorly understood. While they are known to interact with a few cofactors, this study shows that Hox proteins can also interact with a wide range of transcription factors in the live Drosophila embryo through conserved short linear motifs (SLiMs). The specificity of these interactions relies on the usage of SLiMs, which often restrains the interaction potential of Hox proteins. The novel buffering activity of SLiMs was observed in different tissues and found in Hox proteins from cnidarian to mouse species. The study challenges the traditional role assigned to SLiMs and provides an alternative concept to explain how Hox interactome specificity could be achieved during embryonic development. The researchers used bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) to profile a wide range of Hox protein interactions in the Drosophila embryo and investigate whether SLiMs could influence their specificity in vivo. They identified AbdA-interacting partners, focusing on TFs that could participate in the transcriptional programs of Hox proteins in their various developmental contexts, and observed a total of 33 TFs that could compete against AbdA/Exd assembly. The findings provide new insights into how Hox transcriptional specificity could be reached in vivo and add to the functional repertoire of SLiMs.
The study reveals a network motif in the brain for a fundamental behavioral choice made by bilaterally symmetric animals - whether to respond to a sensory stimulus by moving to the left or to the right. The hindbrain is identified as an evoluntionarily old and conserved region of the brain that mediates such choices. By studying the escape response of larval zebrafish, the authors identify key inhibitory neurons in the circuit that lie in a column of morphologically similar cells that is one of a series of such columns that form a developmental and functional ground plan for building hindbrain networks. Repetition within the columns of the network motif may therefore lie at the foundation of other lateralized behavioral choices. The experiment involves defining network connectivity in the hindbrain important for the lateralized escape behavior of zebrafish then testing the role of neurons by using laser ablations and behavioral studies.
Mammalian cells produce a type I interferon (IFN) response to fight viral infections, with most cells capable of synthesizing type I IFNs. However, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and oocytes are incapable of producing IFNs. This antiviral mechanism is conserved in virtually all cell types. The mechanisms regulating this pathway during pluripotency are still unknown. The interaction between miR-673 and MAVS acts as a switch to suppress the antiviral IFN during pluripotency. The absence of miRNAs enables ESCs to synthesise IFN-β and mount a functional antiviral response. MiRNAs specifically downregulate MAVS, with Dgcr8-/- cells more resistant to virus infection than Dicer-/- cells. ESCs lacking miRNAs respond to poly(I:C) and express IFN-β, and suggest that miRNAs are responsible for silencing the IFN response to dsRNA. IFN-β expression in ESCs occurs upstream of IFN production. The inhibitor BX795 blocks TBK1/IKKε phosphorylation, whereas BMS345541 is an inhibitor of the catalytic subunits of IKK and thus blocks Nf-κB-driven transcription. Both inhibitors increased viral susceptibility in wild-type cells lines, however, the effect was far greater in the knock-out cell lines, suggesting that miRNAs regulate the interferon pathway upstream Ifnb1 transcription. The Mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein (MAVS) has a central role in the RLR-induced (Rig-I-like receptors) IFN pathway, where activated MDA5 and RIG-I receptors translocate to the mitochondria and bind MAVS to ultimately induce Ifnb1 expression.
The article discusses the importance of sodium/proton antiporters in maintaining pH and ion balances in the body. The structure of the archaeal sodium/proton antiporter MjNhaP1 in two states - inward-open and outward-open - was determined, revealing a 7° tilt of the 6 helix bundle. The antiporter is part of the cation-proton antiporter (CPA) family, which includes the medically important human NHE sodium proton exchangers. The antiporters are essential for homeostasis, and the study reveals how they use a sodium gradient to maintain intracellular pH by expelling protons from the cell. The research also shows that MjNhaP1 has 13 transmembrane helices arranged into a 6-helix bundle, and that the N-terminal H1 is essential for transport activity. Comparison with other antiporters and mutational analysis provides insights into the mechanism and important residues involved in transport activity.
Researchers estimated the spontaneous mutation rate in Drosophila melanogaster lines with minimal natural selection and found evidence of strong stabilizing natural selection acting on quantitative traits. The study used whole genome sequencing to identify mutations and estimate mutation rates, and quantitative measurements of gene expression and organismal traits to understand the origin and maintenance of quantitative genetic variation. They found that the rate of spontaneous mutations was much higher than previously thought, and that the proportion of deleterious mutations accumulated in the lines was higher than that found in standing variation in natural populations. These results suggest that deleterious mutations that would otherwise be lost have accumulated under minimal natural selection.
The nervous system may be involved in tumor development, but the role of the central nervous system in this process is largely unknown. Researchers have found that hypothalamic oxytocin-producing neurons can modulate the progression of colorectal cancer in mice. Activation of these neurons using the chemical celastrol inhibits tumor progression, while depleting them promotes cancer development. Oxytocin neurons in the hypothalamus are important for regulating anxiety, stress, and depression, and their activation can inhibit tumor growth by suppressing cell proliferation and promoting cell apoptosis. The anti-tumor effect of oxytocin neuron activation is dependent on its action in the central nervous system and involves the modulation of sympathetic neuronal activity in the celiac-superior mesenteric ganglion. These findings suggest that stimulation of oxytocin neurons may be a novel strategy for colorectal cancer treatment.
The article discusses the antisaccade task, which is a task that measures cognitive function and requires participants to look away from a salient visual cue. The study aims to identify the unique neural mechanisms involved in performance and when they are engaged. The study finds that both reflexive and voluntary mechanisms progress rapidly, with reflexive mechanisms driving the eyes towards the cue early on and voluntary mechanisms directing them away later. The article describes the urgent antisaccade task, which requires participants to program a saccade to the opposite location of the cue before knowing the direction of the correct response. The study generates a special psychometric function, the 'tachometric curve,' which tracks success rate as a function of the perceptually relevant time interval. The tachometric curve exhibits a unique, non-monotonic shape that reflects the interaction between early involuntary and later voluntary processes. The study finds that the timing and depth of the vortex depend strongly on cue luminance, with weaker luminance weakening attentional capture and impacting the top-down process at work in the task. The article indicates that the findings can be used to understand the dynamics of attentional and oculomotor neural circuits.
Researchers have identified a chromodomain as the potential mechanism underlying the ability of a specific DNA intermediate in the repair of DNA to be faithfully removed. The intermediate is the Holliday junction (HJ), which connects homologous DNA strands and often needs to be disentangled after repair is complete. In the study, human HJ resolvase GEN1 was found to contain the chromodomain, which directly contacts DNA and was shown to severely restrict GEN1’s catalytic activity after being removed. The study also underscored the importance of understanding the interplay between resolution and dissolution mechanisms in the repair of DNA.
Transcription factors (TFs) are critical for gene regulation, but their access to DNA binding motifs is hindered by nucleosome positioning. Researchers used mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to show that the TF CTCF displaces nucleosomes from its binding site and organizes nucleosomal arrays, not only in steady-state but also during replication and mitosis. Correlative analyses suggest that this is associated with fast gene reactivation after replication and mitosis. Certain TFs, such as CTCF and Esrrb, act as resilient TFs governing the inheritance of nucleosome positioning at regulatory regions throughout the cell cycle. The study also explores the dynamics of nucleosome repositioning after replication over regions bound by different combinations of TFs. Regions organized by Esrrb display prominent non-nucleosomal DNA regions and organized nucleosomal arrays after replication. In contrast, TFs like Oct4/Sox2 fail to rapidly reorganize nucleosomal arrays after replication.
A mathematical model has been developed to analyze the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of small-molecule communication among temperate phages (viruses that infect bacteria) that use the lytic cycle (actively infecting tens to thousands of new phage particles are produced and released through host-cell lysis) and the lysogenic cycle (latent infection where the phage DNA is integrated into the host cell's genome) to inform their lysis-lysogeny decision. The model predicts that a communication strategy in which phages use the lytic cycle early in an outbreak and switch to the lysogenic cycle later when susceptible cells become scarce is favored over a bet-hedging strategy where cells are lysogenized with constant probability. For such phage communication to evolve, the phage-bacteria populations must be regularly perturbed away from their equilibrium state, and new outbreaks of phage infections in pools of susceptible cells must continuously occur. When phages, lysogenized cells, and susceptible cells coexist for prolonged periods, less and less virulent phages are selected. The mathematical model uses ordinary differential equations to describe a well-mixed system consisting of susceptible bacteria, lysogens, and free phages to study the baseline scenario and the full scenario.
Keratin intermediate filaments have been found to directly regulate the formation of microridges, which are elongated protrusions on the surface of mucosal epithelial cells that integrate actin and intermediate filaments. Plakin family cytolinkers envoplakin and periplakin, which bind F-actin and keratins, were found to be required for the morphogenesis of microridges, and plakin protein levels dictate microridge length. Microridge morphogenesis involves distinct steps, expanding our understanding of intermediate filament functions. Keratins are the strongest and most stable cytoskeletal elements, and their stability and strength make them ideal for maintaining cellular integrity. Plakins link cytoskeletal elements together, potentially linking F-actin with keratin filaments in microridges. Mutant analysis of evpl and ppl revealed that they contribute to the stability and elongation of microridges, and Ppl likely plays a keratin-independent role in the initiation of microridge morphogenesis.
Ribosomes are universal protein-synthesizing machines that are highly conserved in their structure and function throughout all kingdoms of life. However, each domain of life has evolved unique ribosomal proteins that are added to the conserved core. Eukaryotic ribosomes contain 13 domain-specific proteins that may play roles in translation initiation, which is both more complicated and more highly regulated in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. The eukaryote-specific ribosomal protein RACK1 is a WD40-repeat β-propeller protein that binds the solvent-exposed face of the 40S subunit near the mRNA exit channel. It has been found in complex with several proteins involved in signal transduction. The eukaryote-specific Asc1/RACK1 are required for efficient translation of mRNAs with short open reading frames that show greater than average translational efficiency in diverse eukaryotes. Asc1-sensitive mRNAs are preferentially associated with the translational ‘closed loop’ complex comprised of eIF4E, eIF4G, and Pab1, and depletion of eIF4G mimics the translational defects of ASC1 mutants. Together, the results reveal a role for Asc1/RACK1 in a length-dependent initiation mechanism optimized for efficient translation of genes with important housekeeping functions. 

The study investigates the role of Shank3 in sleep architecture and regulation in mice with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which often co-presents with sleep problems. Mice lacking exon 21 of Shank3 have problems falling asleep even when sleepy. Sleep problems in ASD predict the severity of ASD core diagnostic symptoms and have a considerable impact on the quality of life of caregivers. Overall, the study shows that Shank3 is an important modulator of sleep and clock gene expression in ASD. The findings may lead to a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying sleep problems in ASD and may one day lead to the development of successful treatments or interventions for this comorbidity.
A study in the journal eLife has found that a thermodynamic model for gene regulation can accurately predict the interactions between mutations and their environmental dependence, indicating that it is possible to predict the effects of cis-regulatory mutations from first principles. The study analysed the effects of mutations in a prokaryotic cis-regulatory element - the region upstream of a gene containing DNA-binding sites for RNA polymerase and transcription factors - which serves as a molecular system where the phenotype is determined by an interaction between multiple components, rather than a single protein. The study found that 58% of double mutants exhibited a change in the sign of epistasis between two environments, indicating that the molecular architecture of a repressible strong promoter affected binding of DNA-binding proteins.
Dragonflies have been found to have small target-selective neurons that exhibit enhanced sensitivity for predicting the location of targets displaced to new locations from their prior path. The neurons are driven by predictive mechanisms involving a large local increase in contrast gain, which spreads forward and can even transfer between brain hemispheres. The dragonfly's tractable physiological nature makes it a useful model for studying predictive pursuit of prey. Previous research on neural processing of moving objects has shown neuronal adaptation and sensitization in the retina, which allows responses from a network of overlapping ganglion cells to anticipate the current target location. In contrast, the predictive encoding of future target location observed in dragonflies indicates the presence of additional processing mechanisms beyond the retina.
The ability to quickly detect and properly react to negative signals in the environment is crucial, especially in social situations where these signals are often ambiguous, requiring contextual cues for interpretation. However, the specific mechanisms underlying the contextual effects of negative signals remain poorly understood. Using computational modeling and EEG signals, researchers have discovered that gaze direction activates threat-signaling emotions, such as anger paired with direct gaze and fear paired with averted gaze, in ventral face-selective and dorsal motor cortices just 200ms following face presentation, and that anxiety levels can affect the responses. They found that gaze direction does not reflect increased attention to the threat-signaling emotions but instead tunes neural processing in sensory and motor systems for different adaptive purposes.
A study of songbirds has shown that exposure to tutor song leads to the elimination of excitatory synapses in the HVC brain area, while inhibitory synapses are rapidly inserted during tutoring. However, subsequent song maturation eliminates the structural imbalance between excitation and inhibition. These findings suggest that sensory exposure triggers the developmental onset of goal-specific motor circuits by increasing the relative strength of inhibition and a synapse-elimination model of song memorization. The study also found that neuronal connections in the brain are highly susceptible to experience-dependent modifications during the critical period of learning early in life. 

The study used electron microscopy to investigate the effects of tutor song exposure on HVC synapses and found that one day of tutoring led to a decrease in the HVC asymmetric synapse density, while the HVC symmetric synapse density increased. Extended tutoring had the effect of removing both excitatory and inhibitory synapses. The study also found that high synapse densities are costly and are therefore not maintained beyond the critical period. 

Overall, the study suggests that both excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitter systems are involved in shaping the structural and functional outcomes of sensory experience, and a better understanding of these systems during developmental learning may be of therapeutic relevance for severe mental disorders.
Kelch-like protein 41 (KLHL41) stabilizes sarcomeres and maintains muscle function by preventing aggregation and degradation of Nebulin, an essential component of the sarcomere, according to research involving KLHL41 mutant mice that display lethal disruption of sarcomeres and aberrant expression of muscle structural and contractile proteins. Nemaline myopathy is one of the most severe forms of congenital myopathy and KLHL41 mutations in humans have been associated with the disease. The new findings provide new insight into the molecular etiology of NM and reveal a previously unrecognized role for Kelch proteins in protein stabilization and chaperone activity. The study also revealed that KLHL40 prefers to stabilize NEB and LMOD3 over degrading them.
The study focuses on the role of growth cone dynamics in neural circuit assembly, which is largely unknown. The researchers developed a high-resolution imaging method to study growth cone dynamics in cultured Drosophila brains, focusing on R7 photoreceptor neurons. The researchers found that the majority of growth cone filopodia exhibit fast and stochastic dynamics that stabilize early and change final position by passive dislocation. Surprisingly, the cell adhesion molecule N-Cadherin controls both fast filopodial dynamics and growth cone stabilization, and loss of N-Cadherin causes destabilization of R7 growth cones resulting in active growth cone 'jumping' between layers. The study highlights the importance of assessing subcellular dynamics in relation to long-term neuronal development during brain wiring.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a rare liver cancer typically affecting healthy adolescents and young adults between the ages of 15-25 with no history of liver disease, making early diagnosis difficult. Currently, surgical resection is the only potential cure. Recent developments in understanding the molecular biology of FLC offer hope for the development of drug therapies. FLCs produce a specific chimeric enzyme, DNAJ-PKAc, that is incorporated into A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP) signaling complexes, where it interacts selectively with the chaperone Hsp70. Elevated levels of Hsp70 are frequently seen in cancers, making it a target for therapy. Gene editing techniques have created disease-relevant murine cell lines, which demonstrate increased proliferative capacity over wild-type cells, and drug screening has revealed Hsp70 and MEK inhibitor combinations that selectively block proliferation of AML12 DNAJ-PKAc cells.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), researchers have determined that infants’ brains process pain in a similar manner to adults’ brains. Areas of the brain that encode sensory and affective components of pain were found to be active in infants, indicating that infants can feel pain. This has implications for more effective pain management for infants, who are often undertreated for pain due to the limitations of behavioural and physiological pain assessment measures. The study found that infants have increased sensitivity to nociceptive stimuli compared to adults, but further research is needed to determine whether this sensitivity is due to differences in skin thickness or differences in transduction or subsequent central processing of the input.
Researchers have developed a zebrafish model to study alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS), a pediatric soft-tissue sarcoma caused by PAX3/7-FOXO1 fusion oncogenes. The model identified PAX3-FOXO1 as a unique target that contributes to impaired myogenic differentiation and has prognostic significance in human disease. Three promoters (beta actin, CMV, and ubiquitin) that induced PAX3-FOXO1 transformation in zebrafish had varied requirements for tp53M214K as a sensitizing mutation. The beta actin promoter driving the expression of PAX3-FOXO1 is tumorigenic in zebrafish, both in a wildtype and a p53-deficient genetic background. PAX3-FOXO1 induces unique embryonic phenotypes, including Cyclopia, which was present in 30% of injected embryos. The study highlights zebrafish as a complementary model system that can address genetic and cellular issues related to pediatric diseases.
This study compares chemical fixation, the traditional method of preparing brain tissue for electron microscopy, to cryo fixation, which is thought to preserve the ultrastructure of tissues more faithfully. The brains of adult mice were fixed using both methods, with results showing that chemical fixation caused significant tissue distortion, including a reduction in the extracellular space. In contrast, cryo fixation revealed larger numbers of docked synaptic vesicles, a smaller glial volume, and a less intimate glial coverage of synapses and blood vessels. The study has implications for improving image contrast and imaging speed on a larger scale, and for reconstructing different features of the brain.
Caspase-8 is a protein often downregulated in cancer, but it is retained in some tumors, including glioblastoma (GBM), suggesting it may support cancer growth. GBM is characterized by extensive angiogenesis and an inflammatory microenvironment that promotes its development and resistance to therapies. Caspase-8 has been shown to sustain neoplastic transformation in vitro in human GBM cell lines and, through activation of NF-kB, enhances the expression and secretion of cytokines and growth factors that lead to neovascularization and increased resistance to Temozolomide. These findings demonstrate that Caspase-8 expression promotes tumor growth and neoangiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, and correlates with a poorer prognosis in high-grade human gliomas.
Increased intracellular pH (pHi) is a characteristic of cancer cells and enables various cancer cell behaviors, such as cell proliferation and migration, as well as limiting apoptosis. The increased pHi is paradoxical because the production of metabolic acids generated by aerobic glycolysis would be expected to lower pHi. Previous studies have suggested that therapeutic targeting of proteins that facilitate increased pHi, e.g., carbonic anhydrase 9, H+-ATPases, Na+-H+ exchanger NHE1, and monocarboxylate transporter family members MCT1 and MCT4, to reduce H+ efflux and lower pHi could limit cancer progression. However, it remains unresolved whether increased pHi is sufficient or necessary for cancer progression in vivo. In this study, the authors used Drosophila melanogaster to show that increased pHi is sufficient to induce dysplasia in the absence of other transforming cues and potentiates growth and invasion with oncogenic Ras. Moreover, limiting H+ efflux with oncogenic Raf or Ras induces acidosis and synthetic lethality in Drosophila models and clonal human mammary cells. The authors argue that synthetic lethality with reduced H+ efflux and activated oncogene expression could be exploited therapeutically to restrain cancer progression while limiting off-target effects.
Acquired immunity to severe malaria is not due to improved parasite elimination (resistance), but instead to mechanisms of disease tolerance that function to limit the pathological consequences of infection. A single malaria episode is sufficient to induce host adaptations that can minimize inflammation, prevent tissue damage, and avert endothelium activation. Monocytes are functionally reprogrammed to prevent their differentiation into inflammatory macrophages and instead promote mechanisms of stress tolerance to protect their niche. All of these adaptations operate independently of pathogen load and limit the damage caused by malaria parasites in subsequent infections. Mechanisms of host resistance can eliminate pathogens, but it is disease tolerance that functions to preserve life.
Researchers have developed a small animal model that can be used to study HIV-1 antibody elicitation and efficacy in vivo. The model, called RhIV, uses a chimeric Rhabdo-Immunodeficiency virus based on vesicular stomatitis viruses (VSV) with HIV-1 Env proteins, and transgenic mice expressing human CD4 and CCR5 on mouse CD4+ cells. The RhIV model enables the study of HIV-1 Env-receptor interactions, antiviral activity of antibodies, and humoral responses against HIV-1 Env in a genetically manipulatable host. The model could be useful in studying HIV-1 vaccine development, which has been impeded by intrinsic obstacles to eliciting broadly effective antibodies due to HIV-1 sequence diversification, glycosylation shielding, and large population sizes with short generation times. While rare HIV-1 infected individuals generate potent, broadly neutralizing antibodies, they typically arise only after years of infection. In addition, a convenient animal model system has been lacking in which to study antibody elicitation and efficacy.
A new study investigated the role of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in bistable visual perception - when the brain perceives alternating visual stimuli. Using a novel brain-state-dependent neural stimulation system, the researchers identified causal effects on percept dynamics in three PFC activities - right frontal eye fields, dorsolateral PFC, and inferior frontal cortex. The study found that different PFC areas had distinct functions, with the DLPFC enhancing the integration of two PFC-active brain states, whereas IFC promotes functional segregation between them. The findings suggest that brain-state-dependent behavioural responses could imply underlying neural mechanisms that are accounted for by brain state dynamics.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is responsible for folding and modifying proteins that are transported along the secretory pathway. Insufficient protein-folding capacity in ER causes accumulation of unfolded proteins, which induces the unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR signals are transmitted across the ER membrane via the interaction of Ire1 with messenger RNA (mRNA), which then initiates the splicing of HAC1 mRNA, the key transcription activator of UPR target genes that mitigate ER-stress. In this study, researchers discovered that Ire1 clustering facilitates HAC1 mRNA docking onto a positively charged motif in Ire1's cytosolic linker domain that tethers the kinase/RNase to the transmembrane domain, and that mRNA docking per se is a prerequisite for initiating Ire1's RNase activity, and thus splicing. This stepwise engagement contributes to selectivity and efficiency in UPR signaling.
The proper functioning of the nervous system relies on correct wiring, wherein molecular gradients guide the motile tips of developing axons, called growth cones, to their targets. However, in vitro, growth cones follow random trajectories, and how molecular gradients influence their movement is unclear. This paper introduces a mathematical model based on persistence, bias, and noise to explain this behavior, while constraining it by analysing data from detailed statistics of growth cone movements. The model explains why average axon turning angles saturate rapidly with time in vitro at small values. This research provides an accurate predictive model of growth cone trajectories to deepen the understanding of axon guidance events both in vitro and in vivo, which will help in the study of several neurodevelopmental disorders.
Scientists have identified structural changes in a protein that enable it to act as both an ion channel and a lipid scramblase. The team from the Max Planck Institute of Biophysics in Frankfurt compared the TMEM16A calcium-activated chloride channel and the nhTMEM16 scramblase, which together make up the TMEM16 family of membrane proteins. Although the TMEM16 family had been expected to function solely as anion channels, it is now known that TMEM16A and companion protein TMEM16B are the only ion channels in the group. The researchers discovered a membrane-spanning furrow on TMEM16A, that provides a path for lipids in scramblases, has formed into an enclosed aqueous pore two microscopic images in diameter.
The α-dystroglycan (α-DG) receptor is essential for maintaining the integrity of skeletal muscle-cell membranes and the structure and function of the central nervous system. Proper post-translational modification of the receptor, including the addition of a phosphorylated O-mannosyl glycan and a laminin-binding heteropolysaccharide, is required for its function. Mutations in genes involved in this process can result
A study of scalp electrical brain activity in 4-6 month old infants watching a rapid rate of complex images has found that the infant brain can segregate faces from natural background scenes and generalise face-selective responses across changes in size, viewpoint, illumination as well as expression, age and gender. A response at exactly at the face stimulation frequency of 1.2 Hz was found in the EEG spectrum of 15 infants when looking at complex images of various faces and objects presented one-by-one on a computer screen at a rate of 6 images/s. These observations made with a highly sensitive and objective approach open an avenue for clarifying the developmental course of natural image categorisation in the human brain.
Researchers have discovered a crucial component of the malaria parasite that could improve the efficacy of vaccines: the Plasmodium falciparum Cysteine-Rich Protective Antigen (PfCyRPA). The 2015 World Health Organization report estimated that there were 214 million clinical cases of malaria and 438,000 deaths that year. PfCyRPA is one of three proteins that are key to the successful invasion of red blood cells by the malaria parasite. Experts say that a vaccine which incorporates PfCyRPA would give protection against the disease that was “at least 50% better” than anything now available.
A study on rats shows that exposure to early-life adversity (ELA) can affect neurobiological development in a sex-specific manner, with females affected earlier than males. The study looks at the impact of ELA on the connection between the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and the prefrontal cortex (PFC), and finds that ELA can disrupt maturation of female resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) and result in anxiety-like behavior. The study highlights the importance of considering individualized intervention strategies based on sex and timing of stress exposure to effectively address psychopathologies associated with ELA.
The transport of oskar mRNA to the posterior of the Drosophila oocyte is an essential step for the formation of the abdomen and germ cells in the embryo. Kinesin 1 transports oskar mRNA to the oocyte posterior along a polarised microtubule cytoskeleton that grows from non-centrosomal microtubule organising centers (ncMTOCs) along the anterior/lateral cortex. The formation of this polarised microtubule network requires posterior regulation of microtubule growth, which is controlled by dynactin. A mutation in the dynactin Arp1 subunit causes a defect in the delivery of oskar mRNA to the posterior cortex. However, it does not affect other RNA transport processes that are dependent on dynactin. The phenotype appears to be due to a general defect in kinesin-dependent transport to the posterior cortex of the oocyte, not anchoring or translation. Furthermore, oskar mRNA movements were not affected in the mutant, indicating that dynactin is not required for the kinesin-dependent transport of oskar mRNA. Thus, dynactin acts as an anti-catastrophe factor that extends microtubule growth posteriorly.
Researchers investigated how Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling regulate limb development in the axolotl, a type of urodele. They found that Shh-expressing cells contributed to the most posterior digit, and that inhibiting Shh signalling inhibited Fgf8 expression and patterning. Salamander limbs lack a morphological and molecular apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and Fgfs and their cognate receptors were expressed solely in the mesenchyme. The study shows that salamander limb development deviates from anurans and amniotes in at least two key respects, but that some mechanisms are still conserved across tetrapods.
Researchers have identified cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) as an important regulator of the mammalian circadian clock, which may be linked to various diseases associated with a disrupted 24-hour clock, such as obesity, cancer and neurological disorders. The CDK5 kinase plays a critical role in the regulation of the circadian clock and may represent a link to these disorders, involving phosphorylation of a crucial clock component called PER2, which is involved in the establishment of an adequate circadian period of the molecular circadian cycle. The study identified CDK5 as a protein kinase promoting the nuclear transport of PER2 which is regulated in many cases by kinases, such as CDK5, and which is critical for establishing an adequate circadian period of the molecular circadian cycle.
Rett syndrome is a postnatal neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene, which can result in loss of language, motor and social skills, and the development of hand stereotypies, anxiety, tremors, ataxia, respiratory dysrhythmias, and seizures, amongst other symptoms. Researchers have found that deleting Mecp2 only from GABAergic inhibitory neurons in mice replicates most of this disorder's phenotype. Researchers have genetically restored Mecp2 expression only in GABAergic neurons of male Mecp2 null mice, which significantly enhanced inhibitory signaling, extended lifespan, and rescued ataxia, apraxia, and social abnormalities, but did not rescue tremor or anxiety. Female Mecp2+/- mice showed a less dramatic but still substantial rescue as well. The findings highlight the critical regulatory role of GABAergic neurons in certain behaviors and suggest that modulating the excitatory/inhibitory balance through GABAergic neurons could prove a viable therapeutic option in Rett syndrome.
Yap, a transcriptional regulator and key effector of the Hippo pathway, is essential for the formation of salivary glands, specifically submandibular glands. Deletion of Yap in developing submandibular glands resulted in a loss of ductal structures due to reduced expression of Epiregulin, which is necessary for the expansion of ductal progenitors. Lats1/2 also play a critical role in proper ductal maturation by removing nuclear Yap localization. The study shows that Yap-induced Epiregulin signaling promotes the identity of ductal progenitors, and proper control of Yap localization by Lats1/2 is essential for ductal maturation. The findings help to better understand early patterning events that are coupled with branching morphogenesis.
Researchers have developed a novel model that combines reactive stopping and proactive no-go decisions by utilizing knowledge of the circuit-level organization of corticobasal ganglia networks. The model evaluates how the efficiency of fast hyperdirect braking depends on the state of the descending execution process originating in the striatal pathways. Using behavioral measures and functional MRI (fMRI), the model accounts for both behavioral and fMRI responses during inhibitory control tasks better than alternative models by incorporating the effects of context in reactive and proactive control into a single unifying parameter, while distinguishing action cancellation from no-go decisions.
Sex-specific triacylclyerides (TAGs) have been discovered in several subgenus of Drosophila, including 11 species, and they act as pheromones that have the ability to inhibit courtship from other males. These tags are made up of at least one short branched tiglic acid and a long linear fatty acyl component, which has not been reported before in other natural products. These findings suggest that the diversification of chemical cues used by desert-adapted Drosophila as pheromones may be related to their specialized diet of fermenting cacti. TAGs are broadly conserved across the Drosophila subgenus in various species and have been observed to increase in abundance as males age. The expression of TAGs and long OAcs is present exclusively in the ejaculatory bulb of males and is synthesized there. These sex-specific TAGs are generally expressed in males but are not found in species from Sophophora.
Researchers investigated the mechanisms underlying the motor flexibility needed for animals and humans to adapt to environmental demands. They studied optomotor-induced turning and the neuronal mechanisms underlying the differences between the leg movements of the two body sides in the stick insect Carausius morosus. They found that the generation of turning kinematics in an insect are the combined result of descending unilateral commands that change the leg motor output via task-specific modifications in the processing of local sensory feedback as well as modification of the activity of local central pattern generating networks in a body-side-specific way. The study sheds light on how the nervous system generates motor flexibility during curve walking in insects.
Researchers have identified a 'missing link' in the evolution of eukaryotes - the TSET complex - that existed some 2 billion years ago when eukaryotes emerged, giving rise to nearly all visible life on earth. The TSET complex acts on the processes that give rise to endomembrane compartments, which mediate intracellular membrane trafficking. The TSET is found in diverse eukaryotes, including plants and Dictyostelium, and provides new insights into early eukaryotic evolution.
Mutations in the PIK3CA gene have been associated with cancer and brain and body overgrowth disorders. In particular, they have been linked to severe segmental cortical dysplasia (SEGCD), which includes hemimegalencephaly and focal cortical dysplasia. Mouse models expressing the most common activating PIK3CA mutations were generated, accurately replicating all key pathological features including brain enlargement, cortical malformation, hydrocephalus, and epilepsy. Results showed that acute 1 hr-suppression of the PI3K pathway using inhibitors had anti-epileptic benefits in these models, indicating a promising new avenue for effective anti-epileptic therapy for intractable pediatric epilepsy patients.
The impact of dietary selection on genome evolution for optimal nutrient intake is not fully understood. Drosophila simulans and sechellia were analyzed to answer this question. D. sechellia larvae, who thrive on a nutrient-scarce diet, did not survive in sugar-rich environments, while the generalist D. simulans was sugar tolerant. The genomic variation that affects genes that control global metabolic control determines the optimal range for dietary macronutrient composition. Macronutrients are essential for animal growth, longevity, and reproduction, and their balance significantly affects development, reproduction, and longevity. The impact of nutrient composition on various life history traits depends on the animal’s genetic makeup. The nutrient-sensing mechanisms of each nutrient determine the tolerated upper and lower limits of nutrient intake at the intra and intercellular level, as well as gene regulatory networks, which control metabolic pathways. This research implied that the sugar intolerance phenotype of D. sechellia may be caused by altered sugar tolerance genes.
A study conducted by researchers at the University of Sheffield in the UK has led to new insights into the evolution of ascorbate, or vitamin C, biosynthesis in eukaryotes. The team found that photosynthetic eukaryotes developed alternative biosynthetic pathways employing l-galactonolactone dehydrogenase (GLDH) in place of the standard terminal enzyme, l-gulonolactone oxidase (GULO), that is mutated in humans and most other primates. They suggest that this switch allowed uncoupling of ascorbate synthesis from hydrogen peroxide production and contributed to the rise of ascorbate as a major photoprotective antioxidant. The result of this change is that ascorbate acts to protect photosynthetic cells against reactive oxygen species derived from the chloroplast, protecting against photodamage.
The authors investigated the relationship between the noise produced in gene expression and the evolution of gene regulation through the creation of synthetic Escherichia coli promoters. Their results showed that promoters exhibited low noise by default and that selection acted to increase the noise levels of highly regulated promoters, rather than reduce them. The authors suggest that gene expression noise acts as a rudimentary form of regulation that facilitates the evolution of more accurate regulation. The paper provides a theory about the interplay between gene expression noise and gene regulation that explains these observations. The authors suggest that transcriptional noise is an evolvable trait that is subject to natural selection, but it is largely unclear how noise levels have been shaped.
Activation of type-1 cannabinoid receptors (CB1Rs) by endo- or exocannabinoids, such as the marijuana component 9-tetrahydrocannabinol, triggers rapid and reversible non-muscle myosin II dependent contraction of the actomyosin cytoskeleton through a Rho-GTPase and Rho-associated kinase. This induces rapid neuronal remodeling such as retraction of neurites and axonal growth cones, elevated neuronal rigidity, and reshaping of somatodendritic morphology. Chronic pharmacological inhibition of non-muscle myosin II prevents cannabinoid-induced reduction of dendritic development in vitro and leads, similarly to blockade of endocannabinoid action, to excessive growth of corticofugal axons into the sub-ventricular zone in vivo. These results suggest that CB1R can rapidly transform the neuronal cytoskeleton through actomyosin contractility, resulting in cellular remodeling events ultimately able to affect the brain architecture and wiring.
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) are often prescribed to patients with Marfan syndrome as a prophylaxis against aortic aneurysm progression, although evidence for their efficacy and safety in this disorder is limited. Unexpectedly, Marfan mice treated with CCBs show accelerated aneurysm expansion, rupture, and premature lethality that is dependent on extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) and angiotensin-II type 1 receptor (AT1R) activation. Researchers have identified protein kinase C beta (PKCβ) as a critical mediator of this pathway and found that both the PKCβ inhibitor enzastaurin and the anti-hypertensive agent hydralazine can normalize aortic growth in Marfan mice. Furthermore, patients with Marfan syndrome and other forms of inherited thoracic aortic aneurysm taking CCBs display an increased risk of aortic dissection and need for aortic surgery compared to patients on other antihypertensive agents.
Bathymodiolus mussels are a dominant species found in deep-sea hydrothermal vents and cold seeps worldwide. They live in symbiosis with sulfur-oxidizing (SOX) bacteria, providing them with nutrition. The genomes of these SOX symbionts from two Bathymodiolus species were sequenced and compared with those of their closest relatives, revealing that the symbionts have undergone genome rearrangements and up to 35% of their genes may have been acquired through horizontal gene transfer. Many of the genes specific to the symbionts were homologs of virulence genes, and an array of genes similar to insecticidal toxins of nematode and aphid symbionts, and toxins of pathogens such as Yersinia and Vibrio were discovered. The SOX symbionts express these toxin-related genes (TRGs) in their hosts leading scientists to hypothesize that the symbionts use TRGs in beneficial interactions, including protection against parasites.
Researchers have identified a new mechanism for suppressing the tumor suppressor gene, Von Hippel-Landau (VHL), in cancers that do not have inactivating mutations in VHL. The study found that Daam2, a protein that promotes glioma formation, suppresses VHL expression in a variety of cancers, including glioma, by facilitating VHL's ubiquitination and degradation. While mutations in VHL are associated with clear-cell renal carcinoma, they are only seen in limited subsets of malignancies. The study identified a new mechanism for VHL inactivation in tumors without genetic mutations. Daam2 is highly expressed in glioma and Glioblastoma multiforme, and it promotes cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. It is poorly understood how developmental processes regulate expression of key components of tumorigenic pathways, and the findings support the idea that these processes may play a role in tumorigenesis.
A multi-scale modeling study has shown that the coupling of inhibitors and activators with the physical growth of hair follicles (HFs) is enough to drive periodicity and excitability in hair regeneration. The study revealed that the skin of mice behaves as a heterogeneous regenerative field composed of anatomical domains with distinct cycling dynamics for hair follicles. The study also found that interactions between fast-cycling chin and ventral HFs and slow-cycling dorsal HFs produced bilateral symmetric patterns in mice. Ear skin behaves as a hyper-refractory domain with HFs in extended rest phase. The combined signaling activities of BMP and WNT pathways constitute important components of the hair cycle clock. The model revealed that skin as a whole behaves as a heterogeneous regenerative field, where dominant hair cycle waves begin in the ventrum, propagate dorsally in a bilateral pattern, stop at the boundary with hyper-refractory ear skin, and break at non-propagating anatomical landmarks, such as eyelids and ears.
A recent study analyzed somatic alterations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from 1675 tumors to identify cancer-associated mutations. The researchers identified 1907 somatic substitutions, which showed replicative strand bias and predominantly exhibited C>T and A>G mutations on the mitochondrial heavy strand. These mutations were shown to be almost exclusively the product of a mutational process specific to mitochondria and were linked to mtDNA replication. The study also found no evidence for positive selection of mitochondrial mutations during oncogenesis, suggesting that they provide no clonal advantage to cancer. Ultimately, the findings indicate that the endogenous mutational mechanism has far greater impact than any other external mutagens in mitochondria and is fundamentally linked to mtDNA replication.
The synaptic function of amyloid precursor protein (APP) is not well understood, but it is known to be enriched at the synapse. Researchers have discovered that APP can physically interact with KCC2, a protein that is essential for GABAergic synaptic transmission. APP deficiency results in reduced levels of KCC2, leading to a depolarizing shift in the GABA reversal potential (EGABA). This study elucidates a new molecular pathway in which APP regulates GABAAR-mediated inhibition in the hippocampus. GABAergic function is commonly disturbed in many neuronal disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). The findings provide a link between the endogenous function of APP and the etiology of AD.
Researchers have discovered that single cells within a transgenic zebrafish can behave as autonomous cellular oscillators, potentially shedding light on the role of collective processes in the segmentation clock found in vertebrates. Without examining the properties of individual cells separated from neighbouring cells, it has been challenged to distinguish between the relative contributions of individual and collective processes to the observed behaviour of a population of cells. The segmentation clock regulates the sequential and rhythmic segmentation of the body axis in vertebrate development, according to rhythmically-oscillating coordinated cells that produce rhythmic gene expressions in the embryo.
The document reports on a study that investigated the role of SIRT1, a protein deacetylase, in regulating sphingolipid degradation in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and mouse embryos. Sphingolipids are important components of cell membranes and signaling molecules that control cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. The study found that SIRT1 deficiency in mESCs resulted in abnormal accumulation of sphingolipids, particularly sphingomyelin, which increased membrane fluidity and impaired neural differentiation in vitro and in vivo. The study also identified the SIRT1-c-Myc axis as an important regulatory mechanism for cellular sphingolipid metabolism and neural differentiation. Specifically, SIRT1 regulates transcription of Smpdl3b, a GPI-anchored plasma membrane-bound sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase, through c-Myc. The study suggests that pharmacological manipulation of SIRT1-mediated sphingomyelin degradation might be beneficial for treating human neurological diseases.
This study investigates the organization of the holocentromere in Caenorhabditis elegans, which is essential for the segregation of chromosomes during cell division. Centromeres vary in size and sequence composition, with point centromeres containing a single nucleosome and holocentromeres extending along the entire chromosome. This study shows that C. elegans holocentromeres consist of dispersed but discretely-localized point centromeres, each of which form a single cenH3-containing nucleosome. These centromeres co-localize with kinetochore components and their occupancy is dependent on the cenH3 loading machinery, indicating that the point centromere is the basic unit of holocentric organization. The study provides a mechanistic basis for understanding how centromeric chromatin is maintained.
The article describes a new methodology for studying the development of breast tumors by inducing oncogenes in single cells within a normal epithelial cell layer of mouse mammary epithelial acini. The authors combined this approach with inverted light-sheet imaging and developed an image-data analysis workflow to track the fate of individual cells. They found that small local clusters of transformed cells form tumors while isolated transformed cells do not, and developed a pipeline for analyzing the images and tracking single cells over time. They also identified factors that influence tumor establishment in the epithelium.
A study has been conducted by researchers to examine the role of animal mass in predator-prey pursuits. The study found that mass plays a critical role in determining the outcome of predator-prey pursuits and the ability of animals to time turns precisely. The researchers used a simple model to examine the implications of mass in predation, and found that mass differences between predators and prey affected the outcome of single turn maneuvers. Thus, cornering was found to be more advantageous as an escape manoeuvre as the prey size decreased relative to that of the predator. The study emphasizes that the dynamics of predator-prey pursuit depend critically on mass effects and the ability of animals to time turns precisely.
The document discusses how the protein cytoplasmic dynein, which is involved in transporting vesicular cargos within cells, is also responsible for organizing microtubules (MTs) within the cell. It describes an in vitro experiment in which dynein was shown to crosslink and slide MTs, and how a dimeric motor lacking certain domains was sufficient to drive this activity. The document also explains how dynein generates an inward force within the mitotic spindle that counteracts the outward forces generated by other motor proteins. The mechanism by which dynein organizes MTs in a network has not been fully established; however, the experiments described in this document suggest that dynein slides and crosslinks MTs using a mechanism that differs from other motor proteins.
MorphoGraphX is an open-source software that allows researchers to analyze the interactions between genetics and mechanics to understand the process of morphogenesis. The software works with curved surface images extracted from 3D data, making it easier to quantitatively analyze the evolution of cell shape, proliferation, and gene expression. It is capable of processing surfaces including tissue casts, stereo reconstructions of SEM images, focus stacking microscopes, and scanning probe methods such as Cellular Force Microscopy. The software is modular in design, making it easy to implement new algorithms and to integrate existing libraries. The ability to process curved 2D surface layers of cells over multiple time points in both plants and animals provides a powerful platform to investigate the interactions between shape, genes, and growth.
A study has identified a previously unknown lineage of the bacterium Yersinia pestis, the cause of the plague, that persisted for at least three centuries and could have been responsible for resurgences of the disease in Europe. The lineage identified has not been found in any extant Y. pestis foci sampled to date, and has its ancestry in strains obtained from victims of the 14th century Black Death. The researchers propose that the disease source may have been responsible for the many resurgences of plague in Europe following the Black Death. It is unclear whether the new lineage still exists, and its sudden disappearance is unknown.
A study has found strong evidence linking individual brain structural variations with a range of demographic and behavioural variates across a large cohort of young healthy human volunteers, using comprehensive integrative analysis of multiple structural MR-based brain features. The study highlights the importance of integrating structural features in any analysis of inter-individual differences in functional connectivity and downstream associations with behavioural/demographic variates. The research analysed data from the Human Connectome Project, including structural imaging, diffusion MRI, resting-state and several different functional MRI tasks for each subject, as well as more than 300 behavioural and demographic measures. The study identified a robust ‘positive-negative’ spectrum of behavioural and demographic variates that can be identified using only structural features. These findings build on previous research that links brain function to behaviour and suggests that inter-individual differences attributed to brain function need to be reconsidered taking into account variations in brain structure across the cohort.
Mechanical loading, such as exercise, stimulates bone formation by osteoblasts and increases bone strength, but the mechanisms are poorly understood. Osteocytes sense changes in mechanical load and produce signals that alter bone formation by osteoblasts, however, the molecular mechanisms by which they sense mechanical loads remain unclear. In this study, researchers have identified the ion channel Piezo1 to be required for changes in gene expression induced by fluid shear stress. They found that Piezo1 is a mechanosensitive ion channel by which osteoblast lineage cells sense and respond to changes in mechanical load and administration of a Piezo1 agonist increased bone mass, mimicking the effects of mechanical loading, thus identifying it as a novel target for anabolic bone therapy. The study also found that Piezo1 in osteoblasts, osteocytes, or both, is essential for normal bone size and mass, and plays an essential role in the response of the skeleton to mechanical loads. The molecular mechanisms by which Piezo1 increases bone mass include the modulation of genes such as Wnt1, which represents a critical stimulatory signal to bone formation.
Researchers have developed a way to visualize the function of individual pancreatic beta-cells in living animals, using transgenic zebrafish. They applied a high-resolution two-photon light-sheet microscope to observe calcium activity in every beta-cell and found that beta-cell functional development occurred heterogeneously in two waves, controlled by islet vascularization. Increasing glucose levels activated calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) signaling and this conserved mechanism was observed in neonatal mouse beta-cell maturation. The technology used to observe beta-cell function in vivo can be used to study transdifferentiation, dedifferentiation and regeneration.
The transport of biologically active molecules across tight epithelial barriers has been a major challenge for oral drug delivery. However, a set of synthetic glycosphingolipids has been identified that enables mucosal absorption of therapeutic peptides by harnessing the endogenous process of intracellular lipid-sorting. Peptide cargoes covalently fused to these glycosphingolipids were transported with greater efficiency across epithelial barriers in vitro and in vivo, with the ceramide domain structure playing a decisive role in intracellular sorting. In mice, GLP-1 fused to short-chain glycosphingolipids was rapidly and systemically absorbed after gastric gavage and affected glucose tolerance with serum bioavailability comparable to intraperitoneal injection of GLP-1 alone. This technology defines a means for enabling the uptake and transepithelial transport of protein or peptide therapeutic cargoes for mucosal delivery, and has many other clinical applications.
A study was conducted to investigate delayed post-conflict management behaviour in dwarf mongooses, a habituated wild population. The study found that bystanders take notice of vocalisations produced during within-group conflict events but do not engage in immediate post-conflict affiliative behavior with the protagonists or other bystanders. However, delayed effects of within-group conflict on grooming interactions were observed; fewer individuals groomed on evenings following conflict, but those that did groomed more than on control evenings. Subordinate bystanders groomed with the simulated aggressor significantly less, and groomed more with one another on conflict compared to control evenings. The study provides experimental evidence that dwarf mongooses obtain information about within-group contests and use it to inform conflict-management decisions with a temporal delay.
Non-canonical Frizzled2 (Fz2) signaling generates calcium transients that determine neuronal polarity, migration and synapse assembly in the developing vertebrate brain. The study demonstrates a requirement for Fz2/Ca2+ signalling in determining the final differentiated state of a set of central brain dopaminergic neurons in Drosophila, referred to as the protocerebral anterior medial (PAM) cluster. In a screen for G-protein coupled receptors required for flight circuit maturation in Drosophila, dFrizzled2 (dFz2) was identified. Knockdown or inhibition of Fz2/Ca2+ signalling during maturation of the flight circuit in pupae reduces Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH) expression in the PAM neurons and affects maintenance of flight. Specific knockdown or inhibition of dFz2/Ca2+ during pupal development gives rise to flight defects, whereas knockdown in adults has no effect on flight. Thus, dFz2/Ca2+ transients during development serve as a pre-requisite for normal adult behaviour.
A new knock-in mouse line has been developed to study cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) function in vivo. The mouse expresses a fusion protein of granzyme B and monomeric teal fluorescent protein, allowing for quantitative analyses of cytotoxic granule (CG) maturation, transport, and fusion in vitro with super-resolution imaging techniques. In vivo, the fusion protein enables the visualization of tissue rejection through individual target cell-killing events. The GzmB-mTFP knock-in mouse is a valuable tool for studying CTL function in both basic immunology and personalized cancer immunotherapy. The mouse is viable, fertile, and has wild-type-like killing capacity. The new mouse line is an ideal tool to investigate CG function in primary CTLs without the need for transfection of CG markers. The knock-in mouse line is suitable for studying CTLs in concert with other immune cells in vivo.
The primary axis (head-to-tail) in fly embryos is established by anterior determinants, which are lineage-specific maternal mRNAs localized at the anterior egg pole. Different fly species evolved an unexpected diversity of anterior determinants, with genes like odd-paired (Zic) and cucoid contributing to embryo polarity. In some species, like Clogmia, a maternal transcript isoform of odd-paired is localized in the anterior egg and adopted the role of anterior determinant without essential protein change, while in culicine and anopheline mosquitoes embryo polarity rests on genes like cucumber and pangolin, respectively. The basal-branching crane flies also express maternal pangolin transcript at the anterior egg pole, suggesting that pangolin functioned as the ancestral axis determinant in flies. Maternal germ plasm also contributes to embryo polarity in some fruit flies, however, it was lost in Clogmia. Maternal odd-paired transcript is absent in freshly deposited eggs of chironomids and mosquitoes; however, it is present in a sand fly species of public health concern, Lutzomyia longipalpis, suggesting that a broad range of moth flies use this transcript as an anterior determinant.
The loss of the pulmonary lineage specifier NKX2-1 augments the growth of lung adenocarcinoma, and causes pulmonary to gastric transdifferentiation. Researchers have discovered that the transcription factors FoxA1 and FoxA2 are critical for initiation of mucinous NKX2-1-negative lung adenocarcinomas in the mouse and activation of their gastric differentiation program. These transcription factors are required for mucin production and key elements of the gastrointestinal differentiation program in NKX2-1-negative tumors in a functionally redundant manner. The researchers also found downregulation of FoxA1/2 expression in the squamous component of both murine and human lung adenosquamous carcinoma. The study highlights the critical role of FoxA1/2 in regulating cancer cell identity and growth.
Researchers have identified two cortical interneurons that increase the brain's ability to detect unexpected sounds through stimulus-specific adaptation (SSA). Parvalbumin-positive interneurons provide non-specific inhibition, amplifying SSA. Alternatively, somatostatin-positive interneurons reduce excitatory responses to frequent tones and increase response to rare tones. A mutually coupled excitatory-inhibitory network model is proposed for the distinct mechanisms by which cortical inhibitory neurons enhance the brain's sensitivity to unexpected events. The findings may contribute to treatments for conditions like schizophrenia and autism.
The article discusses how Pathogens use autophagy for their own benefit and how the Phytophthora infestans pathogen activates an unknown plant autophagy pathway to enhance nutrient intake at the pathogen interface. The article explains that the pathogen secretes the effector protein PexRD54 that selectively activates the unknown plant autophagy pathway that antagonizes antimicrobial autophagy at the pathogen interface. The study finds that PexRD54 induces autophagosome formation by bridging vesicles decorated by the small GTPase Rab8a with autophagic compartments labeled by the core autophagy protein ATG8CL. The article shows that PexRD54 mimics carbon starvation-induced autophagy by coupling the host vesicle transport regulator Rab8a to autophagosome biogenesis at the pathogen interface. Furthermore, the article discusses how effectors bridge distinct host compartments to expedite colonization, and how PexRD54 exploits cellulose biosynthesis to facilitate biogenesis of autophagosomes diverted to pathogen feeding sites.
RNA-binding proteins, such as Hfq, play important roles in regulating RNAs and RNA-mediated functions in bacteria. Hfq is an important post-transcriptional gene regulator and protects small RNAs (sRNAs) from degradation. Hfq is known to interact with RNAs through multiple interfaces of its homohexamer structure, including the proximal face, distal face, and rim. The distal face of Hfq contributes mostly to mRNA binding in vivo, while sRNAs can either co-occupy Hfq with mRNA as a ternary complex or displace mRNA from Hfq in a binding face-dependent manner. Hfq can recruit RNase E to promote turnover of certain mRNAs in a sRNA-independent manner, and this regulatory function can be decoyed by sRNA competitors that bind strongly at the distal face. The diffusivity of Hfq changes dynamically as it interacts with different RNAs in live E. coli cells. Specifically, the two classes of sRNA can gain access to mRNA pre-bound Hfq through different mechanisms, and binding of Hfq to certain mRNAs through its distal face can recruit RNase E to promote turnover of these mRNAs in a sRNA-independent manner. Mutations on different Hfq faces changed the ability of Hfq to bind cellular mRNAs, with binding primarily achieved through interactions with the distal face of Hfq.
This document describes a systematic review and meta-analysis of surveys on patterns of social contact and mixing in low- and middle-income countries. The study found that contact rates declined with age in high- and upper-middle-income settings but not in low-income settings, where intergenerational households had the most contacts made at home. The study also observed contrasting effects of gender across the income strata on the frequency, duration, and type of contacts individuals made. The study emphasizes that such differences in contact patterns have material consequences for respiratory pathogen transmission and the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions.
The regulation of CO2 levels in the body is vital for maintaining homeostasis, but it was previously thought that pH sensing was the only way to determine PCO2 levels. However, researchers have now shown that connexin 26 hemichannels are directly modulated by CO2, which is sensed via carbamylation of lysine residues. These connexins are found throughout the brain and other tissues, indicating that direct detection of CO2 may be involved in multiple physiological processes. Only the closely related connexins Cx26, Cx30, and Cx32 are affected, with Cx31 showing no sensitivity to CO2. The researchers propose a carbamate bridge between carbamylated lysine and arginine residues in the adjacent subunit of the connexin hexamer, a mechanism not previously proposed for physiological sensing of CO2.
The purple bacteria's chromatophore, a vesicle that efficiently converts sunlight into ATP synthesis, has been studied through an atomic-level structural model in Rhodobacter sphaeroides. The vesicle's ATP production rate as a function of incident light intensity has been determined, and the energy conversion efficiency of ATP synthesis has been calculated. The chromatophore architecture comprises over a hundred protein complexes that cooperate to harvest light energy for photophosphorylation. It utilizes the Förster mechanism and quantum coherence for efficient excitation energy transfer, followed by the conversion of light energy into chemical energy. The study aims to determine the chromatophore's efficiency based on a supramolecular structural model.
Certain organisms lose the ability to regenerate damaged tissues as they mature. Drosophila imaginal discs can regenerate efficiently early in the third larval instar (L3) but progressively lose this ability. The reduction in damage-responsive expression of multiple genes, including Wnt genes, correlates with restricted regeneration. The study shows that damage-responsive expression of Wnt genes requires a bipartite enhancer whose activity declines throughout L3. This epigenetic silencing is restricted to this enhancer. The study also shows that directing Myc expression to the blastema overcomes repression of multiple genes and restores cellular responses necessary for regeneration. Understanding the cellular differences between homologous organs that differ in their regenerative capacity among species could suggest genetic or pharmacological manipulations that improve the regenerative capacity of damaged organs in humans.
The document explores how animals learn and make decisions based on expected outcomes and previous experience, and how unexpected outcomes can indicate changes in the environment. The basolateral amygdala (BLA) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) are both involved in learning and decision-making, with BLA facilitating learning in response to surprising events and OFC necessary for accurately representing the distribution of wait times to stabilize choices. The study then introduces a delay-based task designed to investigate the effects of expected outcome uncertainty on learning in rats and assesses the causal contributions of BLA and OFC to value learning under such conditions. Results show that the rats were able to detect true changes in outcome values against a background of stochastic feedback, and that both BLA and OFC played important roles in learning under uncertainty.
Organisms change their gene expression patterns in response to environmental changes, and to understand the mechanisms governing this process, a new study perturbed the tRNA pool of Saccharomyces cerevisiae by deleting tRNA genes. As a result, the genetic adaptation that occurs was recurrently based on a strategic mutation that changed the anticodon of other tRNA genes to match that of the deleted one. Strikingly, a systematic search in hundreds of genomes revealed that anticodon mutations occur throughout the tree of life. However, although the selective advantage offered by alternative synonymous codons is considered to be moderate, it was recently demonstrated that selection can still shape codon usage patterns in vertebrates, even with their small effective population sizes.
Researchers from the Broad Institute of MIT have discovered that Cas9, a protein commonly used for genome editing, regulation and imaging in eukaryotic cells, works more efficiently in low-occupancy nucleosomal regions. Current methods for selecting guide RNAs (sgRNAs) that create efficient Cas9 activity have mostly been based on the sgRNA's sequence and properties of the targeted site. The researchers' work, which analysed large-scale genetic screens of human cell lines via nuclease-active and nuclease-dead Cas9 proteins, has shown that nucleosomes act as a barrier directly impeding Cas9 binding and cleavage. Furthermore, it was found that chromatin remodelling restored Cas9 access to nucleosomal DNA. These findings could enhance the accuracy and efficiency of Cas9, leading to more effective gene editing.
The retina pigment epithelium (RPE) is an essential component of the vertebrate eye that undergoes rapid changes during eye development. Researchers have generated a transgenic zebrafish line to track RPE development and have found that RPE cells rapidly stretch and flatten to match the curvature of the neural retina, facilitating optic vesicle folding. This mechanism differs from amniotes, where proliferation drives RPE expansion. The Tg(E1-bhlhe40:GFP) transgenic line was found to be suitable for identifying the first RPE cells and for following early RPE morphogenesis. This study provides important insights into the active contribution of RPE in optic cup formation.
A new study has identified a carrier called Tsr2 that extracts unstable and prone to aggregation proteomes from importins to terminate its import process. Tsr2 can bind to and protect the protein from aggregation and proteolysis, ensuring its safe transfer to the assembling 90S pre-ribosome. This data suggests that there may be a fleet of carriers called escortins that help ensure the safe transport of ribosomal proteins to their correct location. Ribosomes are essential for cellular growth and proliferation, and their assembly is connected to these processes. Assembly of the eukaryotic ribosome takes place in the nucleolus, the nucleoplasm, and the cytoplasm. Nuclear maturation of pre-ribosomal particles requires the release of assembly factors, a process thought to require over 50 energy-consuming enzymes.
Insects have evolved gustatory systems to detect toxins in their environment, as many toxins elicit a bitter taste and an aversive response. The molecular logic of bitter signaling and how taste systems evolve to detect new environmental dangers are unknown. To address this problem, an in vivo expression approach was used to analyze the logic of bitter taste signaling in Drosophila. The study found that individual bitter taste receptors interacted in different ways and in different contexts, exhibiting competition, inhibition, or activation. Bitter compounds elicit different responses from different sensilla, and four functional classes of bitter-sensitive sensilla were identified. Every bitter neuron on the labellum expresses five Commonly Expressed Receptors (CERs), and many or all sensilla also contain a sugar-sensitive neuron (S). Expression of individual Grs had different and sometimes surprising effects in different neurons. These findings suggest a rich source of means by which the taste system can modulate its response to accommodate changes in the internal state of the fly.
The article discusses the importance of proper Notch signaling for stem cell lineages and how the retromer complex regulates Notch receptor retrograde trafficking in Drosophila neuroblast lineages. The study found that upon dysfunction of the retromer, Notch receptors accumulate in enlarged endosomes, where they can cause progenitor-originated tumorigenesis. The study proposes that the retromer serves as a "bomb squad" to retrieve and disarm the potentially harmful pool of Notch receptors in a timely manner. The study also identifies the importance of asymmetric segregation of the endocytic protein Numb as a mechanism for stem cell fate decisions. The article details the specific experiments that were conducted, including genetic screens and transplantation assays. Ultimately, the study concludes that the retromer complex ensures sufficient dampening of Notch signaling in neural progenitors to prevent abnormal cell fate decisions and tumor formation.
A new study has shown that stress during pregnancy can affect the development of the infant brain, particularly the amygdala, in a sexually dimorphic manner. The study measured maternal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity, via hair cortisol concentration (HCC), in postnatal maternal hair samples from 78 mother-infant dyads, and performed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on infants at term-equivalent age. The researchers found that maternal HCC was related to altered amygdala microstructure in boys and changes in structural connectivity to the amygdala in girls. The study suggests that maternal stress during pregnancy, estimated to affect 10-35% of children worldwide, may contribute to impaired cognitive development, negative affectivity, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and other psychiatric disorders.
Researchers have identified a compound called ISRIB that shows promise in ameliorating cognitive defects resulting from neurodegenerative diseases. The compound renders cells insensitive to a key control point in protein synthesis and enhances cognitive function in rodents by blocking long-term depression. Researchers discovered ISRIB activates eIF2B, the molecular machine responsible for release of protein synthesis inhibitors, which then stabilises the activated eIF2B dimers, contributing to the ISRIB mechanism of action. The findings identify ISRIB as an invaluable tool in studies aimed at improving cognitive functions.
Researchers have used electron cryomicroscopy to study the chloride-proton exchanger CLC-7 and its beta-subunit, OSTM1, which plays a critical role in lysosomal homeostasis and bone regeneration. The study focused on chicken and human CLC-7 proteins and revealed an occluded state for the transporter, with constrictions on both ends of the Cl-conduction pathway. The movement and changes of the protonation state of the gating glutamate (Glugate) in the ion transport pathways of CLC transporters remain poorly understood. Dysfunction of CLC-7 can lead to osteopetrosis, lysosomal storage disease, and neurological disorders.
The transcriptional programs that determine the fates of the mammalian trachea and esophagus are not fully understood. The transcription factors NKX2-1 and SOX2 are thought to be co-repressive master regulators of tracheoesophageal fates, but their downstream networks and independent roles are not well-defined. The study used single-cell RNA sequencing with bulk RNA sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation in mouse embryos to identify the NKX2-1 transcriptional program in tracheoesophageal specification. They discovered a NKX2-1-independent transcriptional program and found that NKX2-1 regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal signaling to control mesenchymal specification to cartilage and smooth muscle. The study provides a better understanding of early tracheoesophageal fate
Researchers have identified three novel genes linked to porokeratosis (PK) through massively parallel sequencing and exonic CNV screening of the mevalonate pathway. At least one mutation in one of the four genes in this pathway was found in 98% of familial and 73% of sporadic PK patients. Significantly reduced expression of the wild allele was common in lesional tissues due to gene conversion or some other unknown mechanism. The researchers also observed correlations between the mutations in the four mevalonate pathway genes and clinical manifestations in the PK patients, which might support a new and simplified classification of PK under the guidance of genetic testing.
Researchers have discovered that oxytocin, a hormone involved in social bonding, reduces the excitatory synaptic transmission to dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the brain, which play a key role in signalling reward-related stimuli. The reduction is achieved through oxytocin receptors and endocannabinoid signalling. The study also found that the modulation of transmission is pathway specific and alters the magnitude of short and long-term depression. The discovery could help explain how oxytocin is linked to drug addiction, psychiatric disorders and depression.
Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is a significant cause of stroke and dementia. Studies on the CADASIL model of SVD have shown that elevated levels of TIMP3 (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3) contribute to cerebrovascular dysfunction, which impairs cerebral blood flow (CBF) and the function of cerebral arteries. In their study, the researchers reveal that TIMP3 inhibits the metalloprotease ADAM17 and HB-EGF, which regulates cerebral arterial tone and blood flow responses. They found that increasing ADAM17 or HB-EGF concentration restores cerebral arterial tone and blood flow responses. The researchers suggest that the balance of TIMP3 and ADAM17 activity modulates CBF through regulation of myocyte KV channel number.
Lytic transglycosylases (LTs) are enzymes involved in peptidoglycan (PG) remodeling and have potential as antimicrobial drug targets. Researchers determined a high-resolution structure of the outer membrane lipoprotein LtgA from Neisseria species, a homolog of Slt70. Deletion of the conserved alpha-helix 30 interfered with the integrity of the cell wall, disrupted cell division and separation, and impaired the fitness of Neisseria meningitidis during infection. Additionally, deletion of alpha-helix 30 resulted in hyperacetylated PG, suggesting that LtgA affects the function of the PG de-O-acetylase (Ape 1) and that LTs can modulate the activity of their protein-binding partners. The study reveals that LTs can enhance the activity of one of their protein-binding partners, ascribing a new role to LTs in the PG degrading machinery. Despite the redundancy of LTs, they can be useful potential targets for future antibiotic development.
Dopamine neurons in rats signal inferred value of cues that have not been paired with reward in addition to tracking the cached value of cues previously paired with reward, according to a study published in eLife. The findings suggest dopamine neurons access a wider variety of information than proposed by the temporal difference (TD) learning algorithm, which is limited to error-driven learning that is based on predictions of a reward. The researchers tested 14 rats with electrodes implanted in the ventral tegmental area in a sensory-preconditioning task and found putative dopaminergic neurons responded to cues that had not been paired with reward in a similar way to cues that predicted reward.
The study shows that mutations in the switch III region of the Ras oncoproteins, which drive cell transformation and tumorigenesis, moderately increase Ras activity in all isoforms but the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. The study found that these mutations increase the clustering of Ras into nanoscale signaling complexes on the plasma membrane (nanoclusters), which dictate downstream effector recruitment, MAPK-activity, and tumorigenic cell proliferation. The study shows that altered nanoclustering is the mechanism behind this increase in Ras activity and suggests that these nanoclusters could be direct drug targets. The study also suggests that Ras nanoclustering, coupled with the reorientation of H-ras on the membrane, is a basic systems-level design principle for the generation of high-fidelity signal transduction.
A team of researchers has developed an efficient, cost-effective technique for introducing epitope tags into mammalian stem cells without the use of plasmids or other selection methods. Epitope tagging involves the fusion of a small peptide coding sequence to a protein of interest for precise genetic knock-in of epitope tags into endogenous genes. The new tool consists of co-delivery of Cas9 protein pre-complexed with two-part synthetic modified RNAs and single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide repair templates, achieving knock-in efficiencies of ~5–30% without selection in embryonic stem (ES) cells, neural stem (NS) cells, and brain-tumor-derived stem cells. The technique could be used for systematic surveys of protein expression levels, subcellular location and interactions across many different stem cells.
The article describes how an activator called CarD plays a major role in regulating gene expression at transcription initiation. The article discusses the molecular mechanism of CarD and its interaction with DNA topology in the transcription bubble. CarD is an essential protein found in many bacterial species, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis. The article discusses the need for CarD in bacterial RNAPs as they form unstable promoter complexes, unlike in E. coli RNAP. The structure of the Thermus CarD/RPo complex is also described in detail, including the interaction of CarD with the RNAP β subunit β1-lobe and DNA
Researchers have discovered a new process of antibody memory indicating that IgM memory cells with fewer mutations participate in secondary responses to variant antigens, demonstrating how the hierarchical structure of B-cell memory is used and indicating the potential and limits of cross-reactive antibody-based immunity. The study used mice immunised sequentially with identical or variant Dengue-virus envelope proteins and analyzed antibody and germinal-centre responses. Variant protein boosts induced GCs with a higher proportion of IgM+ B cells, which showed the E4 variant boost had not induced a significant anti-E3 antibody memory response, or the induced antibodies had a low affinity for E3.
The article discusses the development of a lysine-targeted enrichable cross-linker for use in chemical cross-linking of proteins coupled with mass spectrometry (CXMS) to analyze protein complex structures and protein-protein interactions. The cross-linker contains a biotin tag for affinity purification, a chemical cleavage site to separate cross-linked peptides, and a spacer arm that can be labeled with stable isotopes for quantitation. The cross-linker is effective in identifying structural information not easily attainable by crystallography and electron microscopy. After experimentation, the Leiker cross-linker design was chosen for its performance in purification and enrichment of cross-linked peptides. The Leiker cross-linking agent was able to effectively enrich cross-linked peptides from a mixture of ten standard proteins and from complex E. coli lysates. The article also discusses the development of quantitative CXMS to detect protein conformational changes and changes in molecular interactions using isotope-labeled Leiker. Overall, the study presents a powerful tool for the analysis of protein complex structures and protein-protein interactions.
A new study published in eLife has helped gain insight into the evolution of plant development by studying the small signaling molecule, auxin. The study aimed to understand the origin and evolutionary trajectory of all nuclear auxin response protein families and their ability to control growth and developmental processes. The researchers used deep phylogenetics to predict where, when, and from what precursors the auxin response system originated, as well as how the system evolved to develop to its current level of complexity. Studying over 1000 species of plant life, including many algae, the team used transcriptomes from multiple tissue samples to deduce the ancestral state that defined the gene complement at each evolutionary node. The results of the study provide insight into the origin, evolution, and design principles of the multi-functional auxin response system.
A study of soil invertebrate biodiversity in New Zealand has found that commonly used measures of biodiversity may underestimate the impact of land use on soil invertebrates, whereas rarity provides a clearer and more consistent indication of these impacts. The study used DNA metabarcoding to measure invertebrate responses and showed that rarity and phylogenetic rarity – direct measures of the number of species or the portion of a phylogeny unique to a site – showed stronger, more consistent responses across taxa to land use than widely used metrics of species richness, effective species numbers, and phylogenetic diversity. The study detected a total of 11,284 operational taxonomic units, of which 4549 were identified as terrestrial invertebrates, and found that rarity and phylogenetic rarity metrics showed the largest and most consistent land-use-related biodiversity declines. The results suggest that rarity and other diversity metrics placed in a phylogenetic context may more accurately reflect the impacts of land use on soil invertebrate communities than species richness.
Researchers have discovered a new "rewiring" process in the metabolism of the Caenorhabditis elegans nematode, using an alternate set of enzymes to adjust pathway flux to accomplish specific anabolic or catabolic objectives. The study reveals the activation of a beta-oxidation-like propionate breakdown ‘shunt’ in genetic conditions mimicking disease in humans, that breaks down propionate without using vitamin B12, which is essential for the canonical propionate breakdown pathway. The research suggests that metabolic network rewiring in response to vitamin B12 levels enables the animal to thrive regardless of dietary intake.
A study using magneto- and electroencephalography to examine visual target detection found that the use of internal templates in decision-making was temporary and quickly subsided after stimulus onset. The study contradicts classic models of sustained pre-activation, suggesting instead that templates were represented by a matched filter. The study found that the neural patterns in stimulus and template representations are distinct, but their content encoded corresponds over a more sustained period. The study also found that neural signals encoded the difference between the current stimulus and search template, suggesting the presence of a matched filter that allows the flexible calculation of deviations from a search template.
The use of EEG approaches during general anesthesia can provide insight into developmental changes in brain-state dynamics in infants. The study used multi-electrode EEG and video recording to analyze the brain activity of 36 infants aged 0-6 months when awake, and during and emergence from sevoflurane anesthesia. Differences in EEG dynamics were observed due to developmental factors, including synaptogenesis and myelination across the cortex. EEG monitoring in pediatric anesthetic state monitoring is necessary but existing EEG-derived indices developed for adults are unsuitable to serve as a similar reference for infants because of differences in brain responses to anesthetics. EEG monitoring will aid in avoiding the harmful effects of anesthetic on the brainstem and upper pons in infants during surgery.
This scientific article explains the role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the development of blood vessels in the central nervous system (CNS) in zebrafish embryos. The study identifies two proteins, Reck and Gpr124, as key components of this signaling pathway, and shows that they are required for proper brain angiogenesis and neurogenesis. Without these proteins, the formation of CNS vessels is significantly reduced. The study also suggests that tip cells, which lead the formation of new vessels, play a crucial role in this process. The findings shed light on the molecular machinery that governs Wnt-dependent brain angiogenesis and reveal how this pathway regulates tip cell function to promote the formation of CNS vessels.
Fluoroquinolones are the recommended antimicrobial treatment for typhoid, however FQ-resistance mutations in the bacterium Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi have become common, hindering treatment and control efforts. In vitro competition experiments were conducted to assess the fitness of eleven isogenic S. Typhi strains with resistance mutations in the FQ target genes. Six out of 11 mutants carried a selective advantage over the antimicrobial-sensitive parent strain, indicating that FQ resistance in S. Typhi is not typically associated with fitness costs. Double-mutants exhibited higher than expected fitness as a result of synergistic epistasis, which suggests that epistasis may be a critical factor in the evolution and molecular epidemiology of S. Typhi. The study has important implications for the management of drug-resistant S. Typhi, suggesting that FQ-resistant strains would be naturally maintained even if fluoroquinolone use were reduced.
Researchers have discovered that dopamine secretion in mice plays an important role in food anticipatory activity (FAA), which is necessary to recognize feeding times when certain types of food are only available during certain periods of the day. It was found that dopamine deficiency in the D1 receptors of mice led to reduced FAA, whereas mice without the dopamine D2 receptors had normal FAA. The study indicates the importance of dopamine signalling to the D1 receptors in controlling FAA behaviour, which may also play a role in human addiction to substance abuse or overeating.
The tissue microenvironment is an important contributor to the inflammatory response, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. Researchers have identified a "duration code" that determines crosstalk between TLR4-activated canonical NF-κB pathway and lymphotoxin-β receptor induced non-canonical NF-κB signaling. LTβR costimulation enhanced the late RelA/NF-κB response to TLR4, prolonging NF-κB target gene-expressions. Additionally, Nfkb2 connected lymphotoxin signal within the intestinal niche in reinforcing epithelial innate inflammatory RelA/NF-κB response to Citrobacter rodentium infection. The study finds that signal integration via the pleiotropic NF-κB system enables tissue microenvironment derived cues in calibrating physiological responses. The results may facilitate the tight regulation of inflammatory responses. 
CNApp is a web-based tool that allows exploration of copy number alterations (CNAs) in cancer by using purity-corrected segmented data from multiple genomic platforms. It generates genome-wide profiles, computes CNA scores for broad, focal, and global CNA burdens, and uses machine learning-based predictions to classify samples. CNApp was applied to the TCGA pan-cancer dataset of 10,635 genomes and showed that CNAs classify cancer types according to their tissue-of-origin, and that each cancer type shows specific ranges of broad and focal CNA scores. Moreover, CNApp reproduces recurrent CNAs in hepatocellular carcinoma and predicts colon cancer molecular subtypes and microsatellite instability based on broad CNA scores and discrete genomic imbalances. CNApp provides a unique framework to identify relevant clinical implications and is the first open-source application to quantify CNAs and integrate genomic profiles with molecular and clinical variables.
PHF13 is a protein that is involved in various cellular processes, including differentiation, cell division, DNA damage response, and chromatin organization. It binds to chromatin in a multivalent fashion, interacting directly and indirectly via different factors. PHF13 is a molecular reader of H3K4me2/3, an important modification of histone H3 that corresponds to gene regulation. It interacts with chromatin further through its ability to bind to DNA, particularly in regions associated with CpG DNA islands, and through its association with the PRC2 and RNA PolII complexes. Alterations of PHF13's expression are associated with abnormal cell function, particularly in the case of malignant phenotypes. Its direct interaction with chromatin, as detected through electrophoretic mobility shift assays, complements its ability to interact with histone modifications by binding to H3K4me1, H3K4me2, and H3K4me3, in contrast to unmodified H3K4me0. The PHF13 protein and the PHD domain it contains can precipitate H3K4me3 in nuclease-digested chromatin samples.
The activation of the PI3K-mTOR signaling pathway has been shown to induce CNS axon regeneration in mammals, but the downstream effectors involved in this process are not well understood. In a study using retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), researchers found that activation of the AKT isoform AKT3 led to more robust axon regeneration than AKT1 or AKT2. The study also identified the parallel pathways of mTORC1 activation and GSK3β inhibition as critical for AKT-induced axon regeneration. Interestingly, phosphorylation of T308 and S473 of AKT had opposite effects on GSK3β phosphorylation and inhibition, revealing a complex neuron-intrinsic balancing mechanism involving AKT as a nodal point of PI3K, mTORC1/2 and GSK3β. These findings provide insight into the regulation of axon regeneration in the CNS and potential therapeutic targets for CNS injuries.
Researchers have developed an improved genetic code expansion system in Caenorhabditis elegans, which enables the creation of a photoactivatable Cre recombinase that can optically control gene expression in single cells. Using Laser Targeted Activation of Cre-Lox recombination (LaserTAC), the researchers targeted the expression of optogenetic channels to individual C.elegans touch sensory neurons within a left/right pair, revealing that the neurons acted in synergy to produce a robust touch response requiring input from both. The research offers the ability to introduce functionalities into proteins beyond those offered by the set of canonical, naturally occurring amino acids, allowing for the precise spatial control of gene expression in any combination of cells that cannot be targeted with specific promoters.
The paper investigates the role of the synaptic ribbon in the sound encoding process in mice lacking RIBEYE. The study found that the synaptic ribbon regulates the topography of the inner hair cells (IHCs) active zones, calcium channel regulation, and vesicle replenishment. The study demonstrated that the synaptic ribbon is critical for sound encoding at high rates and with temporal precision at IHC synapses. The authors used immunohistochemistry to study the IHCs of the RIBEYE knock-out mice, showing that RIBEYE disruption is partially compensated by multi-AZ organization, with the remaining synaptic deficit indicating ribbon function in SV-replenishment and calcium channel regulation. Additionally, the study found that the multiple AZs at ribbonless IHC-SGN synapses reduce spontaneous and sound-evoked firing rates of SGNs and their compound action potential, resulting in impaired transmission.
The study investigated the use of optogenetic stimulation of whisker pad muscles to induce whisker movements in mice and how this relates to sensory perception. The results showed that optogenetic stimulation of whisker pad muscles results in cortical activity and sensory perception, consistent with the coding of evoked whisker movements by self-generated motor commands. The researchers characterized the amplitude of whisker protractions evoked by varying the intensity, duration, and frequency of optogenetic stimulation and also compared the electrophysiological responses in the somatosensory cortex to optogenetic and mechanical whisker stimulation. They concluded that the results suggest that optogenetic stimulation of whisker pad muscles leads to sensory perception through reafferent signaling.
Researchers have identified a new genus of horse endemic to North America during the Pleistocene Epoch. The extinct New World stilt-legged equids (NWSL) were previously thought to be related to Asiatic asses, but genetic testing of mitochondrial and nuclear genomes has led scientists to conclude that there was only one species, Haringtonhippus francisci, which falls outside of the Equus crown group. The genetic and phenomic approach to resolving the systematics of extinct megafauna will allow researchers to understand the full extent of the terminal Pleistocene extinction event. The Haringtonhippus francisci was extirpated from eastern Beringia 14,000 years ago, and the study suggests that the genus diverged from Equus during the late Hemphillian or earliest Blancan period.
The P2X7 channel is involved in various CNS diseases, but its function in neurons is controversial. To resolve this issue and analyze its functions, P2X7 BAC transgenic mice were generated, allowing visualization of functional EGFP-tagged P2X7 receptors in vivo. These mice showed dominant P2X7-EGFP protein expression in microglia, Bergmann glia, and oligodendrocytes, but not in neurons. These findings were further validated by microglia- and oligodendrocyte-specific P2X7 deletion and a novel P2X7-specific nanobody. The mice also showed potential consequences of its overexpression in ischemic retina and post-traumatic cerebral cortex grey matter. This novel mouse model overcomes previous limitations in P2X7 research and will help to determine its physiological roles and contribution to diseases.
A study of sex differences in mice has found that there is no consistent pattern in which sex has more variability in traits. The study aimed to test two hypotheses that attempt to explain why trait variability might differ between sexes. The ‘estrus-mediated variability hypothesis’ assumes that female estrus cycles cause higher variability across traits in female subjects. Contrastingly, the ‘greater male variability hypothesis’ suggests males exhibit higher trait variability due to males being the heterogametic sex (possessing one X and one Y chromosome), and sexual selection. The study found that neither hypothesis could universally explain patterns in trait variability, and sex bias in variability was trait-dependent. While greater male variability was found in morphological traits, females were much more variable in immunological traits. This has implications for how we conduct biomedical research as studies have traditionally excluded females for reasons related to their estrus cycles. The lack of knowledge on sex-specific differences can lead to overmedication and poor understanding of how sexes respond differently to medical interventions.
The factors that determine the makeup of gut microbiota are not well understood. This study aimed to test the hypothesis that the order and timing of colonization of the gut early in life can lead to variations in gut microbiota in different individuals. The study involved inoculating germ-free mice with two different seed communities or a cocktail of four bacterial strains and a seed community in different orders to determine the influence on community assembly and the success of individual colonizers. The study revealed that colonization order affected community assembly and individual colonizers' ecological success in mice. This study provided evidence of the importance of colonization history in the assembly of gut microbiota, highlighting a potential cause for the high levels of variation in host-associated microbial communities.
Meiotic drivers are genes that break the rules of inheritance by biasing their transmission into gametes, and are known to impact evolution and infertility. Despite this, few meiotic drivers have been identified or characterized mechanistically. This study identifies Sk wtf4 as an autonomous meiotic driver gene that kills gametes that do not inherit it from heterozygotes, in the model eukaryote Schizosaccharomyces kambucha. The gene generates dual, overlapping transcripts that encode both a gamete-killing poison and an antidote to the poison to ensure that only gametes inheriting the selfish allele are not destroyed. The study suggests that the wtf multigene family has proliferated due to meiotic drive, and highlights the significant role these genomic parasites have played in shaping the evolution of this eukaryote.
A muscle specific membrane protein called myomaker is essential for muscle stem/progenitor cell fusion, which is required for proper development and regeneration of skeletal muscle. However, its significance during adult muscle hypertrophy has not been explored. A new study reveals that myomaker-mediated stem cell fusion is essential during physiological adult muscle hypertrophy. The study found that myomaker is activated in muscle progenitors in response to muscle overload after synergist ablation in mice, but not in myofibers. Muscle progenitors were made fusion-incompetent through genetic deletion of myomaker in muscle stem cells, leading to a complete reduction of overload-induced hypertrophy. This blunted hypertrophic response was associated with a reduction in Akt and p70s6k signaling and protein synthesis, suggesting a link between myonuclear accretion and activation of pro-hypertrophic pathways. Furthermore, fusion-incompetent muscle exhibited increased fibrosis after muscle overload, indicating a protective role for normal stem cell activity in reducing myofiber strain associated with hypertrophy. These findings will help in the development of strategies to augment loss of muscle mass due to chronic disease and aging.
The study examines the neural mechanisms of aversive learning in humans to determine how instructed knowledge impacts feedback-driven learning. The results reveal that instructions induce dissociations in the neural systems of aversive learning, with responses in the striatum and orbitofrontal cortex updating with instructions, and amygdala responses being mostly influenced by reinforcement. The findings have implications for fear maintenance in anxiety and support theories of specialized threat-detection.
Leishmaniasis is a deadly parasitic disease that affects millions of people worldwide, with visceral leishmaniasis (VL) being the most severe form. The Indian subcontinent (ISC) is the epicentre of the disease, with up to 80% of global VL cases occurring there. The study analysed the genomes of 204 clinical isolates of Leishmania donovani from the ISC to track the evolution and epidemiology of the disease. The results showed that a genetically distinct population with a two base-pair insertion in the aquaglyceroporin gene LdAQP1 is resistant to antimonials, which are commonly used drugs to treat the disease. The findings indicate the complexity of Leishmania donovani evolution in response to drug treatment and the need for new strategies to control the disease.
Sleep plays a crucial role in consolidating newly acquired memories, but how our brain selects noteworthy information that will be consolidated during sleep remains largely unknown. However, a recent study has found that post-learning sleep favors the selectivity of long-term consolidation. When tested three months after initial encoding, the most important (rewarded, strongly encoded) memories are better retained and remembered with higher subjective confidence. It was also found that sleep spindles strengthen memory representations based on reward values, suggesting a privileged replay of information yielding positive outcomes. Overall, these findings demonstrate that post-learning sleep determines the neural fate of motivationally-relevant memories and promotes a value-based stratification of long-term memory stores.
Researchers have created a wiring diagram of the brain that shows how dopamine neurons compute their outputs, which is crucial for understanding neural computation. Mapping the neural connections between different parts of the midbrain circuit that regulates dopamine neurons, the team found that the majority of dopamine neurons receive an almost identical set of inputs instead of having strong reciprocal connections with their target areas, except for those neurons projecting to the posterior striatum. These neurons received relatively few inputs from the ventral striatum and instead received more inputs from the globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and zona incerta, which regulate emotional responses to both rewarding and punishing stimuli.
Toc75, a membrane channel of the TOC protein import translocon at the outer envelope of chloroplasts plays an important role in chloroplast biogenesis in plants. It is a member of the Omp85 family of bacterial and organellar membrane insertases, which has evolved unique properties specific to the acquisition of protein import during endosymbiotic evolution of the TOC system in plastids. Toc75 is proposed to participate in the targeting and insertion of membrane-anchored outer membrane proteins, including the TOC GTPases. The structural similarity of Toc75 to other conserved membrane transporters led to the hypothesis that T
A study has been conducted on Shigella flexneri, the most common cause of dysentery in low-income countries. The study analyzed the natural history of the species using whole genome sequencing combined with geographical and temporal data. The results show that S. flexneri can be divided into seven distinct phylogenetic groups, each with a distinct geographic range and virulence gene complement. The study also found evidence of antimicrobial resistance determinant acquisition but no subsequent intercontinental spread of the resistant strains. The species has a distinct life-cycle involving local persistence and has been colonizing certain regions for many decades to over 100 years. The study highlights the importance of accurate tracking of bacterial pathogens in effective surveillance and downstream public health interventions.
Researchers have identified the cochaperone Bag-1L as a promising target for treating prostate cancer. Bag-1L binds to the activation function-1 (AF-1) domain in the N-terminus of the androgen receptor (AR), and suppressing the AF-1 domain is an alternative approach to current treatments that aim to inhibit AR signaling through the C-terminal ligand-binding domain (LBD). Bag-1L protein levels increase with progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), and high levels of Bag-1L in primary prostate cancer reduce the clinical benefit from abiraterone. Bag-1L has been shown to interact with the AR through the GARRPR motif in the N-terminus, and the C-terminal BAG domain. By disrupting this interaction using a transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) approach to knock out Bag-1L, researchers were able to reduce prostate cancer growth and limit effective chromatin binding of the AR. The researchers conclude that Bag-1L inhibiting drugs could be used as an alternative to current treatments such as androgen synthesis inhibitors and AR antagonists.
A Bayesian model using data from 102 national surveys has been developed to estimate coverage of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) for malaria control worldwide so as to improve efficiency in their use. The model was also used to explore the impact of uneven distribution among households and rapid rates of net loss. The results show that 21% of ITNs were over-allocated in 2013, meaning that distribution of nets was made to those that already had them. In addition, ITN loss from households was found to be more rapid than previously thought, with 50% lost after 23 months. Though 920 million ITNs are estimated to be needed globally to achieve universal coverage, this study suggests that by improving efficiency these 920 million ITNs could actually yield coverage as high as 95%.

A recent study by Guo et al. identified a role for seryl-tRNA synthetase (SerRS) in vascular development. Previous studies have shown that SerRS regulates vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) expression to prevent vascular over-expansion. It was discovered that SerRS balances VEGFA expression through a tandem mechanism that blocks the major transcription factor promoting VEGFA expression, c-Myc, from binding to the VEGFA promoter and recruits the SIRT2 histone deacetylase to erase prior c-Myc-promoted histone acetylation. In addition, the study also reported the first anti-angiogenic function for SIRT2, which arises, in part, through its interaction with SerRS. These findings suggest that SerRS may be a potential therapeutic target for angiogenesis-related diseases.
The article discusses a study on the development of dorsal air sacs in Drosophila, which depends on the transport of signaling proteins produced by the wing imaginal disc and transported by cytonemes to the air sac primordium. The study found that these cytonemes interact directly with proteins in the stratified extracellular matrix (ECM), which is composed of collagen, laminin, Dally and Dally-like (Dlp) proteins, and that the ECM over PCP mutant cells had reduced levels of laminin, Dally, and Dlp. The study also investigated the role of planar cell polarity (PCP) in cytoneme-mediated signaling, as well as the possible involvement of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and integrins in the process. PK and Vang were found to be necessary for the proper development of the cytonemes, but only in the wing disc cells, while expression of RNAi constructs against other PCP genes, HSPG, and integrin pathway genes resulted in abnormal cytoneme phenotype.
Integrins are receptors that mediate cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix and to other cells. They require an activation step prior to ligand binding and signaling, which is mediated by talin and kindlin. Fibroblasts lacking either talin or kindlin failed to activate integrins, adhere to fibronectin, or maintain their integrins in a high affinity conformation induced by Mn2+. However, Mn2+ enabled talin-deficient cells to initiate spreading on fibronectin, as kindlin directly binds paxillin, resulting in focal adhesion kinase activation and the formation of lamellipodia. Talin and kindlin cooperatively activate integrins, leading to fibronectin binding and adhesion, and kindlin subsequently assembles an essential signaling node at newly formed adhesion sites in a talin-independent manner.
Mutant huntingtin (HTT) is known to cause neurotoxicity in Huntington’s disease (HD), but the mechanism by which it does so remains unclear. A new study has found that mutant HTT impairs the function of a transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) complex, which includes RNA polymerase II subunit A (POLR2A), ataxin-3, DNA repair enzyme polynucleotide-kinase-3'-phosphatase (PNKP), cyclic AMP-response element-binding (CREB) protein, and DNA ligase 3. The complex is responsible for repairing DNA damage during transcriptional elongation, but this function is affected by mutant HTT. Low PNKP activity leads to the accumulation of DNA breaks, particularly in transcribed regions, and activates the DNA damage-response pathway ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM). This in turn causes transcriptional dysregulation, triggering neurotoxicity and functional decline in HD. The study also found that increasing PNKP activity in mutant cells can improve genome integrity and cell survival. These findings provide important mechanistic insights into how mutant HTT triggers neurotoxicity in HD.
Scientists have long been fascinated by the incredible efficiency and specificity of enzymes in catalyzing chemical reactions in living organisms. While much is known about the specific residues involved in these reactions, less is understood about the complex interaction networks that surround and support them. In this study, researchers focused on a five-residue interaction network in the active site of Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase. Through a series of mutagenesis experiments, the researchers found that the network was divided into three energetically independent but structurally connected functional units, rather than being fully cooperative. These findings have implications for our understanding of enzyme function, evolution, and engineering, and will be necessary for designing highly efficient synthetic enzymes in the future.
The development of the retinotectal projection in non-mammalian vertebrates, which connects the retina to the optic tectum in the midbrain, is an example of genetic hardwiring during brain development providing computational architectures for innate neuronal processing. The projection establishes millions of parallel channels for incremental visual field analysis and is due to its neighborhood preserving, topographic organization. Retinal growth cones adapt towards ephrin-A/EphA forward and reverse signals, which provide the major mapping cues. A novel mechanism of coupled adaptation of signaling channels, co-adaptation was formulated to reconcile seemingly incompatible topographic accuracy and adaptability. Retinal GCs adapt towards both ephrin-A forward and EphA reverse topographic signals. A "gap assay" was developed to demonstrate and investigate this phenomenon.
The article discusses the role of LRRK2 kinase in Parkinson's disease and how mutations in this gene can alter synaptic structure and function. The two most common mutations, R1441C and G2019S, were evaluated in two different mutant LRRK2 mouse lines to assess their contribution to synaptic function and structure in striatal spiny projection neurons (SPNs). The study utilized a combination of subcellular fractionation biochemistry, super-resolution imaging, and two-photon laser scanning microscopy to evaluate synaptic alterations in identified SPNs in a systematic way. The results found that LRRK2 mutations reshaped synaptic structure and function, particularly in dSPNs. Further studies may lead to new neuroprotective therapies aimed at SPN synapse function prior to disease onset.
The origins of the HO gene, which plays a key role in the mating-type switching process of the yeast species Saccharomyces cerevisiae, have remained a mystery. A new study now shows that the HO gene is related to a family of unorthodox homing genetic elements found in other yeasts, called WHO elements, which home into the aldolase gene FBA1. The WHO elements resemble inteins, but operate through a different mechanism that does not require protein splicing. The DNA rearrangement steps during WHO element homing are very similar to those during mating-type switching, indicating that HO is a domesticated WHO-like element. The study identified a cluster of WHO genes in the genome sequence of the type strain of Torulaspora delbrueckii and found that WHO proteins resemble homing endonuclease genes. The WHO genes occur in clusters of intact genes and pseudogenes, suggesting that they are part of a mobile genetic element.
Exercise induces the release of a molecule called β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) which induces the activity of Bdnf promoters, particularly promoter I, which is activity-dependent. BHB specifically acts upon HDAC2 and HDAC3, which act upon selective Bdnf promoters. Electrophysiological measurements indicate that BHB causes an increase in neurotransmitter release. Furthermore, exercise reduces Hdac2 and Hdac3 mRNA levels, but not Hdac1 levels in the hippocampus. These findings reveal an endogenous mechanism by which physical exercise leads to the induction of BDNF, which can be used to harness the therapeutic potential of physical exercise for psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases.
Scientists have identified a new protein, called KHNYN, which works with the antiviral protein ZAP to degrade a specific type of RNA called CpG containing retroviral RNA. CpG dinucleotides are typically suppressed in most RNA viruses, including HIV-1, and introducing them into RNA viruses inhibits their replication. ZAP binds to viral RNA containing CpGs to direct their degradation, but requires other cellular proteins, such as KHNYN, to inhibit viral replication. KHNYN selectively inhibits HIV-1 that contains clustered CpG dinucleotides and requires ZAP and TRIM25, a E3 ubiquitin ligase, to confer its antiviral activity. The KHNYN protein requires both its KH-like domain and NYN endonuclease domain for antiviral activity. When CpG dinucleotides are introduced into HIV-1, it allows the scientists to study the mechanisms of action of antiviral proteins in response to these RNA sequences.
Neurosecretory protein GL (NPGL) is a neuropeptide that has been found to increase food intake and white adipose tissue (WAT) in rats, which led to researchers investigating its function as a regulator of energy metabolism. The study found that NPGL drove food intake and fat deposition through de novo lipogenesis and acted to maintain steady-state fat levels in conjunction with insulin. The researchers also found that NPGL can induce de novo lipogenesis in WAT, increase insulin, and selectively induce carbohydrate intake. The dysregulation of NPGL could be a root cause of obesity which can result in serious health problems such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes. The study suggests that NPGL is a promising target for anti-obesity drugs.
The origin recognition complex (ORC) is essential for DNA replication and is loaded onto DNA during the G1 phase of the cell cycle. ORC has been found to be similar in structure and subunit organization between budding yeast and metazoan ORCs. Meier-Gorlin syndrome mutations in Orc6 (a subunit of ORC with somewhat enigmatic function) impair the formation of ORC hexamers, interfering with appropriate ORC functions. The MGS mutation in Orc6 directly affects the integrity of ORC, destabilizing the interaction of Drosophila and human Orc6 with both Orc3 alone and with the core Orc1-5 subcomplex. This ultimately interferes with pre-RC assembly and origin licensing.
A study has found that the auditory experience of a species-specific courtship song in developing fruit flies shapes adult song perception and resultant sexual behavior. Preferences in song-response behaviors of both males and females were tuned by social acoustic exposure during development. The study identified GABA signaling acting on the GABAA receptor Rdl in the pC1 neurons, the integration node for courtship stimuli, regulated auditory tuning and sexual behavior. The research demonstrates that maturation of auditory perception in flies is unexpectedly plastic and is acquired socially, providing a model to investigate how song learning regulates mating preference in insects.
The expression of CX3CR1 on immune cells is important for maintaining tissue homeostasis, and recent studies suggest that misfolded proteins can regulate CX3CR1 expression. This study found that polymers of Z alpha-1 antitrypsin (Z-AAT), resulting from a genetic mutation, strongly lower CX3CR1 mRNA expression in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In individuals with a rare genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), which is characterized by low levels of AAT protein and the presence of intracellular and circulating Z-AAT polymers, CX3CR1 mRNA expression was much lower in PBMCs than in non-AATD controls. Furthermore, ex vivo treatment of healthy donor PBMCs with Z-AAT polymers lowered CX3CR1 mRNA expression and decreased surface expression of CX3CR1. The study suggests that specific conformational properties and/or molecular sizes of Z-AAT polymers are required for their interaction with CX3CR1, and detailed mechanistic studies are required to understand how Z-AAT or other types of protein polymers regulate CX3CR1 levels.
Scientists have conducted the first study to focus on identifying the concurrent effects of multiple environmental factors on gene expression under natural climatic fluctuations in a crop species. By analyzing the genome-wide gene expression patterns of rice growing in rainfed and irrigated fields during two distinct tropical seasons and determining simple linear models that relate transcriptomic variation to climatic fluctuations. These models combine multiple environmental parameters to account for the patterns of expression in the field of co-expressed gene clusters. The scientists showed that additive effects of several environmental factors drive the field expression of multiple co-expressed gene clusters. They also found that the field context reshaped a large part of transcriptional patterns while the effect of season was more limited.
The study aims to provide a neurosensory lineage reconstruction of the inner ear in zebrafish embryos by using in vivo imaging technology. The study presents the first dynamic map of the early neuronal and sensory progenitor pools in the whole otic vesicle, which demonstrates how spatial and temporal cues regulate cell fate and the functional organization of the rudiment of the definitive organ. The findings provide the cellular data needed to understand how gene regulatory networks may work during development, tissue degeneration, and regeneration. The data was obtained by systematically tracking and analyzing individual cells' positions, movements, and divisions using live-imaging microscopy techniques.
The uniformity of cell size is an essential feature of healthy tissues, and cell-autonomous negative feedback mechanisms are critical to maintaining size homeostasis. The sizer model and adder model are the two alternate models proposed to explain cell size homeostasis. The study uses a new experimental approach to determine whether animal cells autonomously sense and regulate their size by monitoring cell size variance. The study found that animal cells monitor their size and correct deviations from the target size using negative feedback mechanisms by adjusting both cell cycle length and growth rate. Consistent with the existence of a cell size checkpoint, the study shows that cells exit G1 in a size-dependent manner. The size checkpoint in animal cells works by temporarily adjusting anabolic growth rates at two distinct points in the cell cycle.
Scientists have discovered that an endolysin known as PlyC has the potential to be a potent agent for controlling intracellular Streptococcus pyogenes (Spy), which causes a range of infections, from impetigo and pharyngitis to sepsis and toxic shock syndrome, and can be hard to treat with antibiotics. In experiments, the PlyC holoenzyme was found to penetrate mammalian cells and clear intracellular Spy in a dose-dependent manner. Quantitative studies revealed PlyCB interacts strongly with phosphatidylserine, and its interaction with other lipids is weak, suggesting specificity for PS as its cellular receptor. PlyCB was found to mediate translocation of the PlyC holoenzyme across the plasma membrane, where it was subsequently trafficked and quantitatively lysed intracellular Spy. The scientists involved in the study believe there is scope for PlyC to be used as a treatment for extracellular and intracellular Spy in humans, and as a scaffold for engineering other functionalities.
The lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC) is a brain region that is important in linking sensory events with the environment where they occurred. To better understand how LEC cells encode this information, researchers recorded neuron activity in rats during a trace eyeblink conditioning experiment, where rats formed associations between auditory or visual stimuli and mild electric shocks. The results show that LEC cells encode information about both the type of stimulus presented and the environment where the stimulus was presented. The study provides insights into how the brain differentiates between overlapping experiences.
A study conducted on mice found that Pet1-expressing neurons (largely serotonergic) play a crucial role in neonatal cardiorespiratory homeostasis and the autoresuscitation response, which uses gasping after an apnea to increase blood oxygen levels to restore normal heart rate and breathing. Using an inducible neuronal inhibition strategy, the researchers discovered that acutely suppressing Pet1-neuron activity resulted in altered baseline cardiorespiratory properties and diminished apnea survival, primarily affecting respiratory components of apnea recovery while sparing much of the cardiac response. These findings provide mechanistic plausibility for serotonergic abnormalities associated with Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) and could inform strategies for pediatric autoresuscitation and SIDS prevention.
The transcriptome of the pheromone gland-ovipositor complex of Helicoverpa assulta was sequenced, revealing an odorant receptor gene (HassOR31) that is highly expressed in the ovipositor. Co-expression of HassOR31 and its co-receptor, HassORco, in a Xenopus oocyte model system showed that the OR was responsive to 12 plant odorants, particularly Z-3-hexenyl butyrate, and electrophysiological responses of some sensilla in the ovipositor were elicited by these odorants. Female moths lacking antennae still preferentially selected oviposition sites containing plant volatiles, indicating that the expression of HassOR31 in the ovipositor helps females find precise egg-laying sites on host plants. Overall, the study suggests that the ovipositor plays a role in odorant detection in moths, challenging the traditional view that only cephalic organs are involved in the detection of volatile compounds in insects.
The Roundabout (Robo) family of repulsive axon guidance receptors plays a crucial role in nervous system development, and disruption can result in movement disorders and other neurological deficits. The Robo family induces axon repulsion in response to its ligand Slit, but the link to the cytoskeleton and the nature of cytoskeletal changes are poorly understood. This study shows that the heteropentameric Scar/Wave Regulatory Complex (WRC), which drives Arp2/3-induced branched actin polymerization, is a direct effector of Robo signaling. The WRC is required for Slit-Robo1 repulsive signaling at the Drosophila midline, and the study proposes a model in which Slit binding induces recruitment of the WRC to the WIRS motif of Robo1 where it functions in Robo1-mediated repulsion at the midline. This study provides new insights into the downstream effectors for Robo1 and the nature of cytoskeletal changes orchestrated by Robo1, which is crucial for understanding the formation of neural circuits during development and in disease pathogenesis.
MFN2 mutations have been associated with axonal neuropathy, with associated lipodystrophy only occasionally noted, however, homozygosity for the p. Arg707Trp mutation was recently associated with upper body adipose overgrowth. Researchers describe similar massive adipose overgrowth with suppressed leptin expression in four further patients with biallelic MFN2 mutations and at least one p. Arg707Trp allele. The researchers also describe a form of leptin deficiency in the face of severe upper body obesity. The findings suggest that specific MFN2 mutations cause tissue-selective mitochondrial dysfunction leading to insulin resistance, confirm a novel form of excess adiposity with paradoxical suppression of leptin expression and suggest potential targeted therapies.
Researchers have identified the role of Angiopoietin-like proteins (angptls) in developing hematopoietic stem cells (HSPCs) and demonstrated that overexpression of angptl2 is sufficient to expand HSPCs in zebrafish embryos. Gene expression studies showed a strong MYC activation signature and that ANGPTL2 can increase NOTCH activation in cultured cells. Previous studies using time-lapse imaging in live zebrafish embryos and live mouse thick tissue sections revealed that HSPCs bud off from the endothelium lining the ventral wall of the developing dorsal aorta (DA) prior to entering circulation. The research could provide insights into the mechanism by which ANGPTLs can expand adult HSPCs.
Lithium is commonly used as a treatment for Bipolar Disorder but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Research has shown that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is necessary for the antimanic effects of lithium but not the antidepressant effects in mice. Lithium can decrease the function of α-amino-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) through dynamin-dependent endocytosis dependent on BDNF and its receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB). Lithium can also increase BDNF mRNA and protein levels. BDNF is necessary for the antimanic-like effect of lithium, as lithium treatment does not block the hyperlocomotor effects of amphetamine in inducible Bdnf knock-out mice. Collectively, these findings provide mechanistic insight into the therapeutic effects of lithium for bipolar disorder.
This study investigates how dopamine contributes to the formation of neural representation in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), using in vivo two-photon population Ca2+ imaging in awake mice. The study found that phasic stimulation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) evokes prolonged Ca2+ transients, lasting around 30 seconds in layer 2/3 neurons of the PFC, which are regulated by dopamine D1 receptors. Additionally, a conditioning protocol with visual sensory input applied 0.5 seconds before the VTA dopaminergic input enhanced Ca2+ transients and increased pattern similarity of PFC neurons to the same sensory input. These findings indicate that dopaminergic input plays a critical role in establishing robust and reliable cortical representation. The study also found that D1 receptors, but not glutamatergic neurons, are mainly involved in the long-lasting Ca2+ response in PFC neurons. Overall, this study sheds light on the mechanism of dopamine contribution to the modification of neural representation in PFC neurons.
A study has found that latent neural stem cells can be found in astrocytes in the adult brain. While neurogenesis is extremely limited in the adult brain, astrocytes in the striatum have been found to generate neurons following certain injuries or Rbpj deletion. Through single-cell RNA sequencing, researchers found that as astrocytes initiate neurogenesis, they become very similar to subventricular zone stem cells and progress through a near-identical neurogenic program. The study suggests that these latent stem cells could potentially be recruited for therapeutic purposes, but would require precise interventions to guide them through their neurogenic program.
A recent study by first-year graduate students at the University of California, San Francisco has discovered that chemical stresses can reduce the buffering effect in the ubiquitin proteasome system, which in turn produces a slightly different fitness landscape. The study, which was published in eLife, employed deep mutational scanning to explore the impact of chemical stresses and completed a series of experiments with Uni mutants. The research demonstrated for the first time that chemical stresses can be used to reduce the buffering effects of the UPS.

EphrinB2 and its receptor EphB4 have been identified as critical regulators of collecting lymphatic vessel integrity. Studies in mice and humans suggest that basal EphrinB2/ EphB4 signaling controls junctional localization of the tight junction protein CLDN5 and junction stability via Rac1/Rho-mediated regulation of cytoskeletal contractility. These findings may provide a potential therapeutic target to selectively modulate lymphatic vessel permeability and function. The disruption of lymphatic endothelial cell-cell junctions in Efnb2-deficient collecting vessels is not caused secondarily by valve dysfunction but suggests a collecting vessel LEC-autonomous function of EphrinB2/EphB4 signalling in regulating junctional integrity of lymphatic vessels.
Two methods, cascade MDFF and resolution exchange MDFF, have been developed to resolve sub-5 Å cryo-electron microscopy maps with either single structures or ensembles of structures, based on the molecular dynamics flexible fitting paradigm. The methods sequentially re-refine a search model against maps of progressively higher resolution, ending with the original experimental resolution. The MDFF refinements offer map-model validation and B-factor determination criteria based on the inherent dynamics of the macromolecules studied, captured by means of local root mean square fluctuations. The MDFF tools are available to researchers through an Amazon Web Services cloud computing resource. The methods were employed on 3.2-Å and 3.4-Å resolution maps of β-galactosidase and the TRPV1 channel, respectively, and were found to resolve atomic structures with accuracy greater than direct MDFF and comparable to that of Rosetta. Structural flexibility as measured by root mean square fluctuations provides an ensemble-based indicator of the overall resolution of a map, offering a quality measure of the imaged macromolecule. RMSF values provide a physical basis for determining optimal sharpening B-factors.
A study has shown that Orai1 channels play a role in regulating basal cellular motility in T cells, which is important for immune function. The study found that inhibition of Orai1 channel activity increased average cell velocities by reducing the frequency of pauses in T cells migrating through confined spaces. Utilizing a genetically encoded cytosolic Ca2+ indicator, the study showed that spontaneous pauses during T cell motility coincide with episodes of cytosolic Ca2+ signaling. The study demonstrates that spontaneous and self-peptide MHC-dependent activation of Orai1 ensures random walk behavior in T cells to optimize immune surveillance.
Research has identified specialised signalling filopodia called cytonemes that aid the dispersion of morphogens, which regulate tissue patterning through their distribution in concentration gradients. Present research has been investigating the mechanisms of gradient formation by active transport of morphogens across the epithelial surfaces. Specifically, research centred around Hedgehog (Hh), which plays a significant role in numerous developmental processes, including stem cell maintenance, axon guidance and cell migration. Previous research demonstrated that Hh is transported via vesicles along cytonemes emanating from signal-producing cells to form a gradient in Drosophila epithelia. However, the mechanisms for signal reception and transfer remained undefined until the present study showed that cytonemes protruding from Hh-receiving cells also contribute to Hh gradient formation. The canonical Hh receptor Patched is localised in these cellular protrusions and Hh reception takes place in membrane contact sites between Hh-sending and Hh-receiving cytonemes. These findings suggest that the described contact sites might facilitate morphogen presentation and reception.
The mechanisms by which T-cell-independent type-2 (TI-2) antigens induce immunoglobulin-G (IgG) responses remain unclear. In this study, researchers found that B-cell receptors were engaged with TI-2 antigens in the presence of costimulation with interleukin-1 or interferon-alpha, inducing the transcription of Aicda and efficient class switching to IgG3 in mouse B cells. TI-2 antigens induced the phosphorylation of protein kinase Cδ, which mediated the production of IgG. The study also found that PKCδ is critical for TI-2 antigen-mediated B-cell receptor signaling to potentiate class switching to produce IgG3. In vivo TI-2 response may be mediated through PKCδ. These findings provide new molecular requirements for class switching in the TI-2 response and highlight its importance in homeostatic commensal-specific IgG production.
RNA splicing is an important part of eukaryotic gene expression, but the in vivo kinetics of splicing are poorly understood. Researchers used transient transcriptome sequencing (TT-seq) and mathematical modeling to quantify RNA metabolic rates at donor and acceptor splice sites in the human genome. They found that splicing occurs in the range of minutes and is limited by the speed of RNA polymerase elongation. Splicing kinetics strongly depend on the position and nature of nucleotides flanking splice sites and on structural interactions between unspliced RNA and small nuclear RNAs in spliceosomal intermediates. They also introduced the concept of 'yield' of splicing as the efficiency of converting unspliced to spliced RNA, which is found to be highest for mRNA and independent of splicing kinetics. This work provides comprehensive global views of splicing kinetics and yield in human cells.
The limited host tropism of hepatitis C virus (HCV) has prevented the development of a small animal model for studying the virus. HCV infects only human and chimpanzee hepatocytes, and previous efforts to create an immunocompetent mouse model have proven unsuccessful. CypA, an essential host factor for HCV replication, may limit the virus's replication in non-permissive species due to incompatibilities between the viral replication machinery and orthologs of host factors. In this study, researchers compared the ability of CypA from mouse, tree shrew, and seven non-human primate species to support HCV replication and found that murine CypA only partially rescued viral replication. The specific amino acid differences responsible were identified, and mutants were generated that were able to fully rescue replication. However, replication in murine cells remained far lower than in highly permissive human hepatoma cells, and minimal infectious particle release was observed. Additional co-factors that remain unidentified will need to be determined for developing an immunocompetent mouse model supporting HCV replication.
Researchers have discovered that in mice, the hormone hepcidin plays an essential role in controlling cellular, as well as systemic, iron levels; disrupting the hormone leads to fatal cardiac dysfunction, even in the presence of normal levels of iron in other parts of the body. The hormone induces internalisation of ferroportin, essential for transferring iron into the bloodstream, thereby limiting its availability to peripheral tissues. Excessive iron can participate in cytotoxic Fenton-type chemical reactions; creating a finely balanced process. Such findings will be of significance in studies concerning the treatment of systemic iron disorders, such as anaemia of chronic disease and haemochromatosis.
Dystonia is a group of inherited and sporadic disorders characterised by disabling involuntary twisting movements, and while the striatum is linked to the dysfunctions, the key cell types that drive dystonic movements are unknown. Researchers have demonstrated that conditional deletion of the DYT1 dystonia protein torsinA in embryonic forebrain progenitors of cholinergic and GABAergic neurons causes dystonic-like twisting movements that emerge during juvenile CNS maturation. The onset of movements coincides with selective degeneration of dorsal striatal large cholinergic interneurons (LCI). These findings demonstrate that dorsal LCI have a unique requirement for torsinA function during striatal maturation, and link abnormalities of these cells to dystonic-like movements in an overtly symptomatic animal model.
A new technology called double resin casting micro computed tomography (DUCT) has been developed for 3D analysis of tubular networks in organs, such as the vascular and biliary systems in the liver. DUCT was used to study a mouse model with Alagille syndrome, which causes intrahepatic bile duct paucity. DUCT identified two compensatory processes occurring in distinct regions of the liver in the mouse model, leading to full reconstitution of wild-type biliary volume and phenotypic recovery. DUCT is a reliable and versatile tool that facilitates standardized architecture analysis and definition of multiple lumenized trees on a whole organ level, revealing novel phenotypes and providing a method of defining organ architecture in mouse models.
RNA virus infections activate the RIG-I family of receptors which induce type-I interferons through the mitochondrial protein MAVS. MAVS forms large prion-like polymers that activate the cytosolic kinases IKK and TBK1, leading to the activation of IRF3 and NF-κB respectively, inducing interferons. MAVS polymers recruit TRAF proteins such as TRAF2, 5, and 6, leading to the activation of IKK and TBK1. TRAF2, 5, and 6 proteins promote ubiquitination reactions which recruit NEMO to the MAVS signaling complex, leading to the activation of IKK and TBK1, indicating their crucial role in IRF3 activation in antiviral immune responses. The innate immune system uses pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to detect pathogen invasion, such as bacterial LPS and viral dsRNA. RIG-I and MAVS are activated by different viral RNA ligands promoting the formation of higher order oligomers leading to the activation of the kinase IKK and TBK1. Ubiquitination plays a significant role in RIG-I signaling activation. TRAF6 has been identified as an IRF3 activator in
Rats have been found to help trapped strangers, such as releasing them from restrainers, just as they help cagemates. However, rats do not help strangers of a different strain unless they have previously been housed with them, demonstrating that pro-social motivation can be expanded from one individual to groups defined by strain. Rats were found to help familiar individuals of a different strain, demonstrating that genetic relatedness alone is not enough to motivate helping. Rats preferentially provide help to members of their own strain, therefore strain familiarity is required for the expression of helping behaviour.
Researchers have developed a new technique called graphene-induced energy transfer (GIET) to probe the conformational organization and dynamics of protein complexes at membranes, which is essential for understanding biological processes. GIET is a unique spectroscopic method that can reveal the axial orientation and dynamics of macromolecular complexes at biological membranes with sub-nanometer resolution. It relies on radiation-less electromagnetic coupling of fluorophores with graphene plasmons, which decays with the axial distance d by d−4. Compared to existing single-molecule-based techniques, GIET provides sufficient spatiotemporal resolution in the 10–20 nm regime, which is relevant for multi-protein complexes. By applying GIET to study proteins involved in vesicular transport and fusion, the researchers were able to uncover the nanoscale spatiotemporal architecture of extended multi-protein complexes at membranes. They established a lipid monolayer coating of graphene to capture His-tagged proteins and immobilize them on the lipid monolayer by tris-nitrilotriacetic acid moieties. They also used DNA oligonucleotides as a nanoscale ruler to calibrate the distance-dependent GIET efficiencies. The results demonstrated the sensitivity and nanoscale accuracy of GIET in quantifying the axial position of proteins onto lipid monolayers.
A study has found that during central nervous system (CNS) inflammation, predominantly genes of the electron transport chain (ETC) are suppressed in inflamed mouse neurons, resulting in impaired mitochondrial complex IV activity. This was associated with inactivation of the transcriptional co-regulator PGC-1α. Neuronal overexpression of PGC-1α led to increased numbers of mitochondria, complex IV activity, and maximum respiratory capacity, as well as a higher mitochondrial membrane potential that related to an improved calcium buffering capacity. Neuronal deletion of PGC-1α aggravated neurodegeneration during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), while neuronal overexpression of PGC-1α ameliorated it. This suggests that elevating neuronal mitochondrial activity is a promising therapeutic approach to counteract inflammation-induced neurodegeneration.
Nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans, orients to the Earth's magnetic field during vertical burrowing migrations, according to a study in eLife. Starved worms moved down, while well-fed worms moved up. The direction and strength of the behaviour correlated with the worm's native magnetic field, with populations in northern and southern hemispheres displaying opposite migratory preferences. Calcium imaging showed that the TAX-4 cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel in the AFD sensory neuron pair was necessary for magnetic orientation and vertical migration. These findings could help scientists better understand how animals detect and use magnetic fields, which could have important implications in the study of living systems.
The study explores how recognition memory controls feeding behavior by investigating how Caenorhabditis elegans forms a memory of particular foods after experience and increases the feeding response when subsequently recognizing familiar food. Familiarity discrimination alters behavior, which the study dissects, providing insight into fundamental problems in neuroscience such as sensory perception and learning and memory. The study also reveals that serotonin increases feeding in C. elegans and that recognition of familiar bacteria indeed increased feeding rate by activating serotonin signaling via type 7 serotonin receptor SER-7.
Researchers have discovered that the hypothalamic neuropeptide orexin can improve the survival rate of sepsis patients by suppressing excessive cytokine production and increasing levels of catecholamines and corticosterone. Orexin helps to restore body temperature and cardiovascular function in LPS-injected mice. The study found that peripherally administered orexin penetrates the blood-brain barrier under endotoxin shock, and that central administration of orexin also suppresses cytokine production and improves survival. The anti-inflammatory effects of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems seem to be synergistic, so the hypothalamic neuropeptide orexin, which regulates the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, could improve patients' conditions. Hypothermia is an important indicator for the severity of sepsis inflammation in rodents and humans, and body temperature at 24 hours post-LPS injection was discovered to be an indicator of eventual survival in the mice studied.
The RNA polymerase II largest subunit (Rpb1) contains a unique C-terminal domain (CTD) composed of consensus Y1S2P3T4S5P6S7 repeats, in which serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues can all be phosphorylated. The CTD performs multiple functions during transcription and most of these are dependent on phosphorylation of specific CTD residues. In this study, the authors investigated the function of the tyrosine residue at position 1 (Tyr1). They found that Tyr1 plays a crucial role in stabilizing the CTD and preventing its proteasomal degradation. Moreover, the authors found that Tyr1 phosphorylation prevents CTD degradation by the proteasome in vitro, and is also detected on chromatin-associated hyperphosphorylated Rpb1, consistent with a role in transcription. These findings shed light on the importance of the CTD in transcription and how it is regulated.
Traditional fluorescent transcriptional reporters used to monitor gene expression have a long half-life, resulting in the loss of dynamic information. To address this, fluorescent transcriptional reporters can be destabilized to shorten their half-life, but signal intensities are significantly reduced. To overcome this, researchers have enhanced translation of destabilized fluorescent proteins, creating a dual-color transcriptional timer that provides spatio-temporal information about pathway activity. This timer is used to identify genes with dynamic expression patterns, which is challenging in cell and developmental biology. Translational enhancers are used to increase the signal of destabilized fluorescent proteins, creating a reporter with a half-life of 2.1 hours. This approach allows for the examination of gene expression dynamics in live tissues with a high degree of accuracy.
Researchers have discovered how a Notch-Delta pathway distinguishes target from non-target muscles in C. elegans, used to determine the local synaptic development and target choices. The study found that the LIN-12/Notch signaling specifies target selection by selectively up-regulating guidance molecules and forming muscle arms in target cells. The study could have implications for understanding how the nervous system in other organisms, including humans, creates functional neural circuits that inform behaviour.
Researchers have discovered that dendritic plateau potentials, a form of synaptic plasticity, can reshape existing place fields in rodent hippocampal CA1 neurons. The Bidirectional Behavioural Timescale Synaptic Plasticity (BTSP) enables synaptic weight changes that depend on the temporal proximity of plateau potentials to pre-existing place fields. The study found that BTSP can strengthen inputs and cause potentiation, which induces synaptic depression and weakening of the inputs. Computational modeling suggested that it is the current weight of each synaptic input that controls the direction of plasticity. The research concluded that BTSP enables network-level population representations to adapt to changes in the environment.
Animals experience a sleep behavior, called stress-induced sleep (SIS), when exposed to an environment that causes cellular stress. This behavior helps animals recover from the stress. In nematodes, SIS is regulated by cytokine activation of the ALA neuron, which releases FLP-13 neuropeptides. A G-protein coupled receptor called DMSR-1 has been identified as the receptor required for FLP-13 neuropeptides to induce SIS behavior. This receptor is expressed non-synaptically in several wake-promoting neurons and likely couples to a Gi/o heterotrimeric G-protein. These findings help to expand the understanding of how a single neuroendocrine cell coordinates an organism-wide behavioral response and suggest that similar signaling principles may function in other organisms to regulate sleep during sickness.
Researchers have successfully created pigs that are genetically resistant to the foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) through the use of transgenic technology. The pigs have been engineered to express FMDV-specific short interfering RNA that suppresses viral growth. In vitro tests demonstrated the efficacy of the RNA, and the pigs proved resistant when provoked with infection. The pigs developed fewer signs of illness and delayed symptoms compared with non-genetically modified pigs, and no onward transmission of the virus was recorded.
A study of Pacific parrotlets landing on perches of varying diameter and texture has revealed the techniques by which they stabilise their grasp. The researchers found that the parrotlets drag their claws over the perch surface to locate surface asperities, after which the claws can undergo superfast movements – within 1-2 milliseconds – on slipperier surfaces to find more secure asperities. The study also demonstrated that parrotlets stabilise their grasp by combining predictable toe pad friction with the probabilistic friction of their claws. The researchers suggest that the findings could help improve the performance of aerial robots.
The cerebellum plays a strong role in avian song learning, providing input to the song-related basal ganglia nucleus in zebra finches through a disynaptic pathway via the thalamus. This input is transmitted to the cortical target and to the premotor nucleus that controls song production. Cerebellar lesions impair juvenile song learning. The basal ganglia and the cerebellum act indirectly through their respective loops with thalamo-cortical and brainstem networks and interact through a subcortical disynaptic pathway through the dentate nucleus, the motor part of the thalamus, and the striatum. The cerebellum and basal ganglia may not simply act in parallel, instead, cerebellar signals may reach the basal ganglia to drive error correction and reinforcement learning through the same output pathway. Stimulation of DCN neurons can drive the activity of pallidal neurons in Area X, confirming that the latter receives a functional input from the cerebellum. DTZ relays Area X neuronal responses to cerebellar stimulation, but glutamatergic transmission in DTZ can be blocked, which suppresses the excitation that DCN stimulation induces in the pallidal neuron.
Researchers have identified a protein, called fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), that inhibits the Zika virus, according to a study published in Nature Microbiology. FMRP binds to the virus's subgenomic flaviviral RNA and retards viral replication. The levels of FMRP drop in areas of the body most impacted by the virus, such as the brain and reproductive tract. The discovery could lead to new treatments for Zika, including the possibility of boosting FMRP levels. The virus has seen an explosion of cases recently, especially in Brazil, and Zika infection during pregnancy can cause problems including microcephaly. 
The article discusses how organisms, particularly bacteria, learn to adapt their behavior to environmental fluctuations to increase their fitness. While learning the structure of fluctuations over an evolutionary timescale is possible, on a shorter timescale, organisms need physiological mechanisms for learning fluctuation statistics and acting upon that information. The article proposes a regulatory architecture, the simple end-product inhibition, and its modifications that allow bacteria to learn correlation and timescale of fluctuations and use that information to predict future environments. The article suggests that the proposed behavior is readily accessible to bacteria's genetic circuits and their low hardware limitation.
Newly born cells decide whether to continue proliferating or exit the cell division cycle by delaying expression of Cyclin E, which promotes DNA replication. ORC1, the largest subunit of the Origin Recognition Complex, represses Cyclin E gene transcription by binding to RB, the histone methyltransferase SUV39H1, and to its repressive histone H3K9me3 mark. ORC1 cooperates with SUV39H1 and RB protein to repress E2F1-dependent CCNE1 transcription. ORC1 inhibits CCNE1 gene expression, allowing time for cells to decide whether to proliferate or enter replicative quiescence. ORC1 is also involved in controlling Cyclin E-dependent duplication of centrosomes and centrioles by inhibiting the kinase activity of Cyclin E-CDK2. ORC1 interacts with RB and SUV39H1 and binds to mitotic chromosomes as cells enter into mitosis. ORC1 is required for repression of the gene encoding Cyclin E, and CDC6 is involved in relieving repression in cooperation with Cyclin E-CDK2.
Researchers have developed a screening technique, called 'clip-chip', to identify potential new lysine deacetylase enzymes in the Escherichia coli proteome. The technique involves delivering thousands of purified proteins onto substrate slides that are then subjected to an enzymatic reaction buffer. The deacetylated proteins can then be identified and characterised. In the study, the screen identified YcgC as a novel lysine deacetylase that regulates transcription by deacetylating Lys52 and Lys62 of the transcriptional repressor RutR. Importantly, YcgC targets a different set of substrates from the only other known E. coli lysine deacetylase CobB, confirming the existence of additional lysine deacetylases in E. coli.
CLC transporters catalyze the exchange of Cl- for H+ across cellular membranes and are critical to a variety of physiological processes. To achieve this stoichiometric exchange, CLCs must follow an alternating access mechanism involving conformational changes in the transporter protein. The conformational change from occluded to outward-facing states has been suggested to involve only the rotation of a conserved glutamate (Gluex) upon its protonation. However, global structural changes have been hypothesized to be involved in regulating ion binding and translocation during Cl-/H+ transport. Using a combination of 19F NMR, double electron-electron resonance spectroscopy, chemical cross-linking, crystallography, molecular dynamics simulations, and analysis of cross-linking in mutant transporters, researchers show that rearrangement of Helices N and P occurs to widen the extracellular vestibule and generate a previously uncharacterized "outward-facing open" CLC conformational state, thereby establishing the involvement of structural changes beyond the rotation of Gluex.
The pathogen Legionella pneumophila manipulates the cellular process of autophagy by delivering an effector protein called RavZ to deconjugate Atg8/LC3 proteins coupled to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) on autophagosomal membranes. To understand how RavZ recognizes and deconjugates LC3-PE, researchers prepared semisynthetic LC3 proteins and elucidated the structures of the RavZ:LC3 interaction. The results showed that RavZ extracts LC3-PE from the membrane before deconjugation, and identifies the LC3 molecule on membranes via its N-terminal LC3-interacting region (LIR) motif. RavZ then recognizes the PE moiety and docks the acyl chains into the lipid-binding site, leading the researchers to identify a novel mechanism through which Legionella pneumophila specifically evades host autophagy. The process of autophagy is a cellular degradation process essential for cellular homeostasis
The Long Interspersed Nuclear Element-1 (LINE-1, L1) is a mobile genetic element active in human genomes that retrotranspose and plays a significant role in the evolution of eukaryotic genomes. The L1-encoded ORF1 and ORF2 proteins bind L1 RNAs, forming ribonucleoproteins (RNPs), which interact with host proteins required for the L1 lifecycle. This study explores the proteins and nucleic acids associated with enzymatically active L1 macromolecular complexes using differential affinity purifications, quantitative mass spectrometry, and next-generation RNA sequencing. The findings reveal the existence of multiple putative L1-related protein complexes engaged in discrete stages of retrotransposition, suppression, or degradation. The study identified proteins linked to both ORF2p and the nucleus, and although the effects of PABPC1, MOV10, and UPF1 on L1 activity have been described, ZCCHC3 effects on L1 remained uncharacterized. The study also suggests that L1s may use exon junction complexes (EJCs) to enhance nuclear export, evade degradation by host defenses, and aggregate with mRNPs within cytoplasmic granules. The study further identifies two distinct populations of L1-ORF-protein-containing complexes, confirming the existence of the ORF1p/ORF2p-containing L1 RNP as a cytoplasmic intermediate related to the canonical L1 RNP typically ascribed to L1 assembly in the literature.
Researchers have discovered that overexpression of fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21) in mice leads to a significant increase in their lifespan, without reducing their food intake. This hormone is secreted by the liver in response to fasting and enhances insulin sensitivity, blocks somatic growth, causes bone loss and other effects that help to adapt the body during starvation conditions. The study found that FGF21 worked by inhibiting the growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 signalling pathway, blunting the associated pathways responsible for the normal aging process. This breakthrough could lead to the possibility of using FGF21 to extend the lifespan of other species.
Herbivorous insects rely on olfaction to locate suitable host plants for their offspring, with plant volatiles providing key cues. Green leaf volatiles (GLVs) are a group of defensive plant volatiles that convey a herbivory-specific message, with the tobacco hornworm Manduca sexta able to convert specific isomers of GLVs when feeding on a plant. This message is monitored by ovipositing M. sexta females, which rely on olfactory sensory neurons to detect such isomeric shifts in host plants. Field experiments demonstrate that ovipositing Manduca moths prefer specific ratios of isomers, providing information about plant attack by conspecifics that the moths use for host plant selection.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein complex (EMC), which comprises six subunits, is a key factor in the biogenesis of multi-pass transmembrane proteins including rhodopsin. dPob/EMC3, EMC1, and EMC8/9, Drosophila homologs of subunits of EMC, were found to be essential for stabilization of immature Rh1 in an earlier step than NinaA, another Rh1-specific chaperone. EMC is also required for the stable expression of other multi-pass transmembrane proteins such as minor rhodopsins Rh3 and Rh4, transient receptor potential, and Na+K+-ATPase. Loss of EMC can cause retinal degeneration. Defects in rhodopsin biosynthesis and trafficking cause retinal degeneration in both Drosophila and humans. EMC is also involved in facilitating lipid transfer from ER to mitochondria.
Researchers have established a chemogenetic dopamine (DA) neuron ablation model in larval zebrafish with mitochondrial dysfunction suitable for high-content screening. Using this system, they have identified the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS) inhibitors as significantly neuroprotective in an in vivo DA neuron imaging-based chemical screen. Knockdown of the angiotensin receptor 1 (agtr1) in DA neurons revealed a cell-autonomous mechanism of neuroprotection. DA neuron-specific RNA-seq identified mitochondrial pathway gene expression that is significantly restored by RAAS inhibitor treatment. The neuroprotective effect of RAAS inhibitors was further observed in a zebrafish Gaucher disease model and Drosophila pink1-deficient PD model. The researchers also examined clinical data and found a significant effect of RAAS inhibitors in delaying PD progression. These findings reveal the therapeutic potential and mechanisms of targeting the RAAS pathway for neuroprotection, utilizing a powerful approach for neuroprotective small molecule drug discovery that leverages whole organism screening and cross-species validation.
The study found that water extracts of Gastrodia elata Blume (GE) and its bioactive compounds, gastrodin and 4-HBA, improved locomotion and protected dopaminergic neurons in a fly model of Parkinson's disease carrying the LRRK2-G2019S mutation. The treatment suppressed the accumulation and hyperactivation of G2019S proteins in dopaminergic neurons and activated the antioxidation and detoxification factor Nrf2 mostly in the astrocyte-like and ensheathing glia, which antagonizes G2019S-induced Mad/Smad signaling. In LRRK2-G2019S transgenic mice treated with WGE, the loss of dopaminergic neurons, hyperactive microglia, and locomotion declines were restored. The study shows the potential of WGE as a complementary therapy for Parkinson's disease.
Researchers have uncovered a new set of genetic regulators involved in the process of leaf ageing. The scientists looked at the way nutrients are redistributed in order to understand how leaf senescence (the ageing process of a leaf) is regulated in a plant’s lifecycle. They discovered that Arabidopsis HDA9 is an important component as a histone deacetylase (HDAC), and that it interacts with a chromatin-binding protein. Their function encourages the wellbeing of the plant and by extension, potentially the yield and quality of crops.
Researchers report the development of a biosensor that can specifically visualize the active conformation of SFK-Fyn in live cells. The biosensor, FynSensor, reveals that cellular Fyn activity is spatially localized, pulsatile, and sensitive to adhesion/integrin signaling, and that growth factor stimulation enhances Fyn activity in pre-activated intracellular zones. The biosensor can also uncover spatially organized, sensitized signaling clusters, direct crosstalk between integrin and growth-factor-signaling, and clarify how compartmentalized Src-kinase activity may drive cell fate. The researchers used a combinatorial library screening method to isolate a binding protein (F29) that targets activated Fyn. They then engineered FynSensor, a sensitive, minimally-perturbing fluorescence-resonance-energy-transfer (FRET) biosensor based on F29, which specifically reports cellular Fyn activity.
The article discusses planarian neoblasts, which are adult somatic stem cells responsible for producing and maintaining all differentiated cell types, including the germline. Despite similarities to embryonic stem cells, the origin of neoblasts during embryogenesis has remained unclear. Through investigations of Schmidtea mediterranea embryogenesis, the study shows that neoblasts arise from a piwi-1+ cell population responsible for producing all temporary and definitive organs. Neoblasts continuously generate subpopulations during adulthood, making them highly pluripotent and comparable to embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells. The study provides a molecular staging resource for Smed embryogenesis, associating unique gene expression signatures with chronological age and embryo morphology. Neoblasts perpetuate embryonic developmental programs during adulthood, where they are required for continued maintenance and rebuilding of tissues during homeostasis and regeneration. Smed flatworms are stable diploids that exist as two biotypes: asexual animals that reproduce by fission and obligate cross-fertilizing hermaphrodites that reproduce sexually.
The article discusses the evolutionary origins of hypoxia-sensitive cells that trigger respiratory reflexes in amniotes. Glomus cells and pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNECs) are two types of cells observed in amniotes that respond to hypoxia by releasing neurotransmitters that can excite respiratory reflexes. It has been hypothesized that glomus cells evolved from chemosensory neuroepithelial cells (NECs) found in fish gills, and that PNECs and NECs share an evolutionary history. This study refutes this hypothesis by showing that
The communication between pre- and postsynaptic cells helps to organize synaptic specializations, but transcriptional regulation is required for subsequent synaptic stabilization. Fibroblast growth factor 22 (FGF22), a target-derived presynaptic organizer in the mouse hippocampus, induces the expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) for the stabilization of presynaptic terminals. FGF22 is released from CA3 pyramidal neurons and organizes the differentiation of excitatory nerve terminals formed onto them. This study found that IGF2 was dispensable for the initial presynaptic differentiation, but required for the following presynaptic stabilization both in vitro and in vivo. The results showed that FGF22 regulates gene expression, and that FGF22-induced molecules contribute to the stabilization of presynaptic terminals. The lack of FGF22 impairs IGF2 expression in young, developing DGCs during the stage of synapse stabilization.
The B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) protein is a repressor of oxidative metabolism that helps regulate the feeding-to-fasting transition of metabolism. It binds with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARα) to suppress the induction of fasting transcription, and deletion of hepatocyte Bcl6 enhances lipid catabolism and ameliorates high-fat-diet-induced steatosis. BCL6 acts mainly as a repressor of transcription, functioning particularly at genes with strongly bound BCL6-binding sites. Furthermore, it recruits a subset of liver SMRT/NCoR-HDAC3 complexes to repress associated regulatory regions. This regulatory signature and the extensive genomic intersection between BCL6 and PPARα suggest that BCL6 might also control fasting-induced gene expression.
Researchers have identified a key interaction between Polo-like kinases (PLK) and SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus protein (STIL) in the regulation of cell cycle progression and centriole duplication. The study found that STIL interacts with the Polo-box 3 (PB3) of PLK4 and uses a secondary interaction site in the PLK4 L1 region. The interaction between PLK4 and STIL plays a crucial role in centrosome duplication and in maintaining the correct centriole number. Mutations of centrosomal proteins have been associated with a variety of human diseases, such as ciliopathies, microcephalies, dwarfisms, and carcinogenesis. The study details a detailed structural and mechanistic understanding of the interaction between STIL and PLK4.
The study researched how digital signaling affects the processing of duration and dose information. The results found that the integral of the stimulus controls the fraction of cells that activate NF-κB in the population. The study found that a transient, strong stimulus caused rapid and uniform dynamics, while a sustained, weak stimulation led to heterogeneous activation and delayed timing. This research is important because it reveals a function for digital signaling beyond simple noise filtering: digital activation controls fate along a two-dimensional space by allowing an input signal to independently control the population response and single-cell response through modulation of signal area and shape.
The Eph receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family has 14 members in mammals and plays critical roles in developmental processes such as tissue patterning, neurogenesis, tissue morphogenesis, and boundary formation. Ephrin ligand binding-mediated intercellular signaling is responsible for the majority of cellular functions characterized for the ephrin-Eph signaling. The cytoplasmic portion of Eph receptors contains a membrane-juxtaposing kinase domain, a protein-binding SAM domain, and a short carboxyl tail PDZ domain-binding motif. The cytoplasmic domains of Eph receptors must be able to engage different intracellular effectors in response to ephrin ligands. The study systematically characterized and compared the bindings of the SAM domain from each Eph receptor to the SAM domains from SHIP2 and Odin. The result revealed that specific Eph SAM and effector SAM-binding pattern. The study also provides insight into many disease-causing mutations identified in the SAM domains of Eph receptors, and allows discovery of SAMD5 as a new intracellular effector of Eph receptors.
Researchers have successfully created double-gene-knockout (DKO) pigs that are resistant to both porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), two highly infectious and lethal viruses that cause major economic losses to pig production. The DKO pigs were generated through a gene editing approach that targeted CD163 and pAPN receptor proteins. The pigs showed no differences in meat-production or reproductive-performance traits, but had increased iron in their muscle. The researchers also found that the DKO pigs exhibited decreased susceptibility to porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV), offering in vivo evidence of pAPN as one of PDCoV receptors. The study provides a valuable model for investigating infection mechanisms of porcine pathogenic viruses that exploit pAPN or CD163 for entry.
The Firmicutes are a type of bacteria that are found in many environments important to human health and industry. In this study, it was discovered that these bacteria use LXG polymorphic toxins to inhibit the growth of other Firmicute species in a contact-dependent manner. The LXG genes are prevalent in the human gut microbiome, which is dominated by Firmicutes. The LXG toxins transit the Esx secretion pathway, which is widely distributed in Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. The NADase LXG protein, TelB, was shown to be secreted via the Esx pathway and to possess NADase activity. These findings suggest that interbacterial antagonism mediated by LXG toxins plays an important role in shaping Firmicute-rich bacterial communities.
Alternative splicing of mRNA precursors is a biological process that regulates gene expression and contributes to human diseases such as cancer. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process linked to both stem-like cell state and cancer cell invasion. Researchers performed a genome-scale expression screen for inducers of EMT and found a significant enrichment of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). They identified QKI and RBFOX1 as necessary and sufficient to induce an intermediate mesenchymal cell state and increased tumorigenicity. The RBPs also coordinately regulated the splicing and function of the actin-binding protein FLNB, which plays a causal role in the regulation of EMT. Skipping FLNB exon 30 induces EMT by releasing the FOXC1 transcription factor and is strongly associated with EMT gene signatures in basal-like breast cancer patient samples. The findings identify a specific dysregulation of splicing that regulates tumor cell plasticity and is frequently observed in human cancer.
The document discusses a study on the alterations associated with myocardial infarction (MI) progression in the heart and other metabolically active tissues (liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose). The study involved a genome-wide transcriptomic analysis on tissue samples obtained 6- and 24 hr post MI or sham operation in a mouse model of MI. The study found dysregulation in multiple biological processes across multiple tissues post MI and tissue-specific dysregulation in biological processes in the liver and heart post MI. The study also used several systems biology approaches, including integrated networks and co-expression networks to identify altered biological functions and pathways associated with MI. The study validated its findings in two independent MI cohorts. The study found that embryonically distinct tissues display similar functional responses to MI, with the most highly connected groups of genes preserved between different tissues. The study concludes that the integrative analysis highlights both common and specific biological responses to MI across a range of metabolically active tissues.
Plants can adapt to environmental stress through induced epigenetic changes, specifically DNA methylation, which affects transcriptional regulation of genes associated with stress response. This adaptation can be passed on to the next generation through the female lineage, but these changes are gradually reset in the absence of stress. DNA methylation changes induced by hyperosmotic stress occur mainly in epigenetically labile regions of the Arabidopsis genome and are associated with transposable elements and other repetitive sequences, which function as distantly acting control elements of key stress-response regulators. These changes rely on the DNA methylation machinery and associated transcriptional changes, but the mechanism remains unclear. This newly acquired plant stress memory allows populations to respond efficiently and quickly to repeated exposure to the same stress, but the extent of transgenerational stress memory in plants remains unclear.
A study has found that cortical astrocytes, a large class of non-neuronal brain cells, can regulate the duration and depth of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep independently via G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling pathways. The astrocytic network is thought to serve as a hub for regulating distinct NREM sleep features, with Gi- and Gq-coupled GPCR signaling separately controlling NREM sleep depth and duration, respectively. Astrocytic signaling causes differential changes in local and remote cortex, suggesting that astrocytes exert different effects on neuronal populations depending on the type of GPCR activated and their localization within cortical circuits. These findings demonstrate a role for the cortical astrocytic network in the regulation of sleep depth and duration across the cortex.
The quality of oocytes is important for successful embryo development, and poor quality oocytes can lead to infertility. Mitochondria play a crucial role in oocyte development, but dysfunctions can affect embryonic competence, particularly in older infertile patients. Previous techniques such as cytoplasmic transfer or the injection of purified mitochondria have shown some success, but the safety and effectiveness of these methods have been questioned. Maternal spindle transfer (MST) is a mitochondrial replacement technique that has demonstrated success in preventing the transmission of inherited mitochondrial diseases. In this study, researchers explore the potential of MST to enhance oocyte developmental competence and overcome embryo developmental arrest. Using mouse models, they optimized the MST protocol and showed that it is technically feasible without impacting the in vitro developmental competence of the oocyte. They also assessed the safety of the technique and found minimal carryover of mtDNA following MST. The mice generated by MST showed low heteroplasmy levels in multiple organs, were fertile, and showed normal histology. This study suggests that MST could be a promising strategy to overcome infertility problems of maternal (oocyte) origin.
The study investigated how cells adapt to replication stress by removing Ctf4, a protein that coordinates enzymatic activities at replication forks in the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The study found that populations adapted to replication stress by acquiring multiple, concerted mutations that altered conserved features of DNA replication and sister chromatid cohesion modules and inactivated DNA damage checkpoint. The selected mutations define a functionally reproducible evolutionary trajectory, revealing the evolutionary plasticity of chromosome metabolism that has implications for genome evolution in both natural populations and cancer.
Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) lack stable tertiary structures, but play a central role in signaling through a process known as allostery. IDPs have historically been difficult to understand how they can allosterically affect function. This study demonstrates how an IDP can control function by simultaneously tuning transcriptional activation and repression, using a novel strategy that relies on the principle of ‘energetic frustration’. The human glucocorticoid receptor was used as a model system to investigate the relationship between disorder and allostery, and to test whether energetic frustration is at the heart of disorder-mediated allostery. The findings of the study suggest that two opposing control mechanisms are at play and that the classic deterministic models of allostery are insufficient to capture the probabilistic nature of this mechanism.
Research shows that Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in mature astrocytes is required for establishing structural organization and remodeling of cortical synapses in a cell type-specific manner. The disruptions in synaptic formation and function are not observed in upper layer neurons where Gli1 astrocytes are relatively sparse. Astrocytes act as key modulators of neural activity and structure during postnatal development in a Shh-dependent manner, establishing Shh signaling as a fundamental mediator of synaptic connectivity. In the mature cortex, deep layer neurons exhibit long-lasting aberrations in the density and turnover of dendritic spines that emerge during postnatal development following selective disruption of Shh signaling in astrocytes.
KIF1C, a member of the kinesin superfamily involved in vesicle and membrane transport, has been found to have a novel function in transporting Rab6A-vesicles and influencing Golgi complex organization by binding directly to the Golgi protein Rab6A both via its motor domain and C-terminus. Rab6A binding to KIF1C's motor domain inhibits its interaction with microtubules, which decreases motility. Depletion of KIF1C slows protein delivery to the cell surface, interferes with vesicle motility and triggers Golgi fragmentation. KIF1C can protect Golgi membranes from fragmentation in cells lacking an intact microtubule network. Rab6A binding to KIF1C motor domain represents an entirely new mode of regulation for a kinesin motor, and likely has important consequences for KIF1C's cellular functions.
RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) transcribes both coding and non-coding sequences in eukaryotic cells, and while the function of non-coding sequences and the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) produced is unclear, recent research explores the role of mitochondrial genome stability in transcription. In budding yeast, for example, a lncRNA called CUT60 stabilizes the downstream ATP16 gene's expression and cellular function. The mechanism works by disrupting the transcriptional elongation process across the ATP16 promoter, which suppresses the expression of ATP16 by inhibiting Transcriptional Interference (TI) - a mechanism that represses gene expression by blurring the boundaries of neighboring transcription units. Failures in the Pol II termination process can impact on genomic stability, and TI can be triggered by flanking lncRNA transcription, destabilizing the mitochondrial genome in cells lacking certain genes' expression. CUT60 is divergently transcribed from the mediator complex subunit MED2, and combining RNA sequencing and growth experiments suggest that cut60 mutations lead to mitochondrial genome loss. So, efficient termination of CUT60 promotes expression of the downstream ATP16by preventing TI and triggering mitochondrial genome stability.
The article investigates the role of Eps8, an actin bundling and capping protein that plays a critical role in development of the nervous, auditory, and reproductive systems, in cancer cell blebbing and migration. The study finds that Eps8 bundling activity promotes cortex tension and pressure to drive bleb-based migration of cancer cells in a non-adhesive environment. The article also explores the molecular mechanisms mediating polymerization-based protrusion and contractility-induced pressure and the molecules responsible for local changes in the actin cortex that allow bleb formation, which is not yet known. The dynamics of Eps8 in blebbing cells are also examined.
Cystic kidney diseases affect millions worldwide, but the molecular mechanisms behind them are not well understood. Invertebrate models, such as Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster, cannot be used to model the diseases. A team compared the ultrafiltration and flow-associated filtrate modification mechanism in planarian excretory systems and the vertebrate nephron and found them to be remarkably similar. They also found that RNA-mediated genetic interference of planarian orthologues of human CKD genes and inhibition of tubule flow resulted in tubular cystogenesis that shared many features with vertebrate CKDs, indicating deep mechanistic conservation. Planarian flatworms have a more complex excretory system, and the team concluded that they could be used as a new, experimentally accessible invertebrate model for studying human kidney diseases.
Researchers have developed a new imaging approach to better understand the clathrin-mediated endocytosis, a vital process that forms vesicles from the plasma membrane. The new approach allows the movements of fluorescently labelled endocytic proteins in relation to one another to be tracked in living cells with a spatial precision of around 10 nm, and a time precision below 1 s. The study showed how different coat proteins are distributed within the coat structure, as well as how the assembly dynamics of N-BAR proteins relate to membrane shape changes. The research also found that the region of actin polymerization is located at the base of the endocytic invagination, with the growing ends of filaments pointing towards the plasma membrane.
A study has identified the presence of pacemaker neurons in the preBötzinger complex (preBötC) of mouse embryo circuitry, which could affect respiratory network activity during the crucial period prior to birth. Three distinct types of discharge pattern were observed in the 84 pacemaker neurons identified, each exhibiting heterogeneous burst-generating intrinsic properties which change during prenatal development. Concomitantly, network rhythmogenesis switches from a purely INaP/ICAN-dependent mechanism at embryonic day 16.5 to a combined pacemaker/network-driven process at embryonic day 18.5. The study shows that the respiratory network at embryonic stages already contains a subpopulation of pacemaker neurons endowed with heterogeneous burst-generating intrinsic properties.
This document discusses the potential of synchrotron-based X-ray micro-tomography (micro-CT) for whole-organism imaging and quantitative histological phenotyping, which allows for the study of volume, shape, and texture of cells across organisms and tissue types. Micro-CT has advantages over traditional histology, as it enables the study of millimeter-scale phenotypes involving convoluted and branched structures such as gills, gut, vessels, and nerve tracts. The isotropic nature of histotomography allows for reslicing in any plane of section without distortion, and dynamic reslicing enables the study of either longitudinal, perpendicular, or other planar virtual sections of convoluted structures. The document also outlines a study involving zebrafish that demonstrates the ability of micro-CT to detect subtle histopathological changes in a whole organism.
Microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs) that are independent of the centrosome play important roles in the organization and function of various types of cells. In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, the MTOC protein Mto1 locates at the nuclear envelope (NE) through interacting with exportin Crm1 and cytoplasmic FG-nucleoporin Nup146. This study found that the stable docking of Mto1 to nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) requires both Ran in the GTP-bound state and Nup146 FG repeats. This research provides insights into the nucleation and organization of non-centrosomal microtubules.
A mutation in the Post-Glycophosphatidylinositol Attachment to Proteins-2 (PGAP2), a component of the GPI biosynthesis pathway, has been linked to the development of cleft lip, cleft palate, edema, and exencephaly (Clpex) in mice. This mutation decreases surface GPI expression, which leads to the apoptosis of neural crest cells and the cranial neuroepithelium. Furthermore, a novel mouse model of NCC-specific total GPI deficiency was generated and demonstrated that these mutants developed median cleft lip and palate, showing a previously undocumented cell-autonomous role for GPI biosynthesis in NCC development. Inherited glycophosphatidylinositol deficiency (IGD) disorders affect the biosynthesis of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, leading to various disorders such as epilepsy, developmental delay, structural brain malformations, cleft lip/palate, skeletal hypoplasias, and others that affect the central nervous system and craniofacial complex. The mutation in PGAP2 leads to a functional GPI deficiency, which results in a decrease of FLAER staining on the cell surface. PGAP2 is expressed in the neural folds and facial primordia of the developing mouse embryo at early stages, and Pgap2null/null embryos have abnormalities in placental development, first branchial arch, limb bud, somites, and more. Overall, this study sheds light on the importance of GPI biosynthesis in NCC development and the development of craniofacial disorders.
Female mosquitoes are attracted to human body heat when seeking a blood meal. Their thermotaxis behavior is selective to stimuli that approximate warm-blooded hosts, seeking relative warmth while avoiding both relative cool and stimuli exceeding host body temperature. The cation channel TRPA1 is required for this specialized host-selective thermotaxis in mosquitoes. This work is important because it identifies a key mechanism by which mosquitoes tune their thermosensory systems toward human body temperatures.
The Drosophila circadian clock involves multiple regulatory delays to ensure a ~24 hour periodicity. The Clock-mediated transcription of per and tim genes is inhibited by Period (PER) and Timeless (TIM) proteins until PER is degraded by Doubletime/CK1 (DBT)-mediated phosphorylation, establishing a negative feedback loop. The mechanisms that regulate delayed PER degradation and Clock reactivation remain unclear. A recent study shows that phosphorylation of certain DBT target sites within a central region of PER affects PER inhibition of Clock and the stability of the PER/TIM complex. Phosphorylation of PER residue S589 stabilizes and activates PER inhibitory function in the presence of TIM, but promotes PER degradation in its absence. The role of DBT in regulating PER activity, stabilization, and degradation ensures that these events are linked chronologically and biochemically, contributing to the timing of a delay that influences the period of the circadian clock. Mutations of S589 block the period changes caused by dbtS but not dbtL, suggesting that the S589 mutations and dbtS lie within the same regulatory pathway. Substitutions of S589 do not shorten the period length by changing the rate of nuclear accumulation of the PER/TIM inhibitory complex. Rather, these substitutions affect PER/TIM protein stability after nuclear entry, which correlates well with the observed changes in period length.
The study investigated the effect of water-use traits on intraspecific population yield in Nicotiana attenuata plants. The research found that variation in a single gene, MPK4, is linked to population overyielding through a mechanism independent of water-use efficiency at the aboveground, population scale. Additionally, the study explored the scales at which the response occurs, and tests excluded the occurrence of overyielding effects at the neighbor scale, implicating a population-scale phenomenon. The research used isogenic plants, silenced in the expression of MPK4, to explore the effect of intraspecific water-use traits on population yields. The findings suggest a novel function of MPK4 in mediating yield response to neighbors in N. attenuata plants.
Diet plays an important role in maintaining lifelong health and reducing the dietary protein: carbohydrate ratio can improve lifespan. Recent research using Drosophila melanogaster found that the role of protein and carbohydrate on lifespan is indirect through the partitioning of dietary sterols. Studies have shown that high protein, low carbohydrate diets are associated with high reproduction and short lifespan, while low-protein, high-carbohydrate diets are associated with longer lifespan and lower levels of reproduction. Balancing the dietary protein and carbohydrate concentrations can reveal a single dietary optimum for both traits, showing that lifespan shortening is not necessarily caused by high egg laying alone. Dietary restriction, or calorie restriction, is a moderate reduction in food intake that extends healthy lifespan across a broad range of taxa. By systematically varying dietary protein, carbohydrate, and cholesterol, it was found that lowering dietary cholesterol was detrimental for lifespan and intensified the negative effects of increasing dietary protein concentrations. Increasing cholesterol also amplified the positive effect on egg laying of increasing dietary protein.
SCP1 is a nuclear transcriptional regulator with a new discovery of acting as a plasma membrane-localised protein in various cancer cells. Its membrane-localisation leads to the dephosphorylation of AKT at serine 473, resulting in decreased risk of tumourigenesis and angiogenesis. Knockout mice of the gene Ctdsp1, which encodes SCP1, led to increased AKT phosphorylation, angiogenesis and tumour growth. SCP1 shuttles between plasma membrane and nucleus through a unique pathway in transducing AKT signalling that is crucial in impeding angiogenesis and tumour growth. Such findings suggest a significant role of SCP1 as a palmitoylation-dependent phosphatase that negatively regulates AKT-mediated angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. SCP1 is a promising novel therapeutic target for cancer treatment.
A study exploring the evolution of cancer protection mechanisms in animals with large body sizes and long lifespans has found that gene duplication of tumor suppressor genes facilitated the evolution of increased body size by compensating for decreasing intrinsic cancer risk. The study focused on Afrotherian mammals, a group that includes both small-bodied and large-bodied species, and found that gene duplications were common in these animals, but were uniquely enriched in pathways that may explain some of the unique cancer protection mechanisms observed in elephant cells. The study also found that lineages without major increases in body size or lifespan, or decreases in intrinsic cancer risk, were also enriched for tumor suppressor pathways.
Researchers have discovered how the different domains flanking a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract shape the conformational landscape of Huntington's disease protein (mHtt) and contribute to neurotoxicity. In vitro, the researchers found that the flanking domains had opposing effects on the conformation and stability of amyloid fibrils and oligomers. In neurons, both domains worked together to engage protective chaperone and degradation pathways, promoting mHtt proteostasis. When proteotoxicity was assessed in rat corticostriatal brain slices, either flanking region alone led to a neurotoxic conformation while the polyQ tract alone exhibited minimal toxicity. This work linking the mHtt conformational landscape with neuronal proteostasis and toxicity could help develop more rational avenues to leverage the roles of the polyQ flanking regions for Huntington's disease therapeutics.
Agricultural strategies face challenges due to the dynamics of local climates, with a slow progress in yield improvement, especially in drought-prone regions. To identify transcriptomic changes during initial perception of drought and new insights on the dynamic physiological changes, a co-expression network approach was applied to the crop Brassica rapa. Using the early response to drought focus, a temporal resolution was provided for correlation of network modules with dynamic changes in stomatal conductance, photosynthetic rate, and photosystem II efficiency. Rising temperatures with attendant increases in drought, insect and disease outbreaks are predicted to result in net losses in yield of North American crops by the end of the 21st century. Water stress accounts for the largest proportion of crop loss in the U.S. To mitigate the predicted increase in water stress on plants and achieve maximal crop yield potential, locally adapted stress tolerance traits are needed. Depending on the plant species and genotype, a combination of avoidance and tolerance traits may be utilized. The potential allocation changes in drought-stressed plants also depend on selection by herbivores and the true cost of defensive molecules as leaf carbon fixation is reduced by drought. Achieving maximum yield while breeding for drought stress responses will likely rely on a balance between avoidance and tolerance strategies. A commonly used measure for assessing drought resistance is the intrinsic water use efficiency (WUE) and usually used as a proxy for drought resistance but not always an accurate predictor of yield capacity under drought. Gene reprogramming was altered over the time course of drought treatment, and significant changes in temporal dynamics of gs and Fv’/Fm’ reveal them to be reliable indicators of early drought perception.
Researchers have developed a systematic review methodology to evaluate preclinical evidence for novel therapies for the first time, which may aid in predicting the likely outcome of human clinical trials. The researchers used meta-analysis to evaluate 20 different preclinical studies involving the use of mesenchymal stromal cells in sepsis, and discovered that mortality is significantly reduced. The researchers believe that systematic reviews could help predict the magnitude and direction of new therapeutic effects in first-in-human trials, thereby increasing the success rate of these trials.
A new study has found that the bacterium Phaeobacter inhibens interacts with the micro-alga Emiliania huxleyi in a laboratory model system, with the bacterium initially promoting algal growth before ultimately killing its host. The bacterially-produced phytohormone, indole-3-acetic acid, was found to drive both algal growth enhancement and algal death. Bacterial production of indole-3-acetic acid and attachment to algae were increased by tryptophan, which is exuded by algal cells. The study shows bacteria significantly influence the physiology and metabolism of E. huxleyi, suggesting coccolithophore-bacteria interactions should be studied in the environment to determine whether they impact micro-algal population dynamics.
The study investigates the varied skin appendages of birds, specifically focussing on the genetic and developmental mechanisms that result in feathered feet in domestic pigeons. The study found that feathered feet in pigeons are a result of partial transformation from hindlimb to forelimb identity, caused by regulatory changes in hindlimb and forelimb-specific transcription factor genes. These findings suggest that changes in expression of regional patterning genes can generate local changes in organ fate and morphology, resulting in diversity in hindlimb scale and feather distribution. The study also identified two major quantitative trait loci (QTL) that have marked and separable effects on qualitative and quantitative variation in epidermal appendages; LG11 had the largest effect on the proportion of the tarsometatarsal epidermis and toe feather number and LG20 had the largest effect on toe feather length. Lastly, the researchers identified genomic regions that contribute to feathered feet using the F2 intercross between muffed (Pomeranian pouter) and scaled (Scandaroon) breeds, connecting the genetic basis of the trait with the altered morphology. Overall, the study provides insights into the genetic and developmental mechanisms behind the striking variation in foot feathering observed in domestic pigeons.
Research has found that reduced cardiac contractility during heart failure is linked to impaired calcium release from Ryanodine Receptors (RyRs), which can be traced to nanoscale RyR reorganization. Super-resolution imaging identified dispersion of RyR clusters in cardiomyocytes from post-infarction heart failure rats resulting in more numerous, smaller clusters. An increased fraction of small Ca2+ release units (CRUs) in HF was linked to augmented ‘silent’ Ca2+ leak, not visible as sparks. Larger multi-cluster CRUs common in HF also exhibited low fidelity spark generation, and when successfully triggered, sparks in failing cells displayed slow kinetics as Ca2+ spread across dispersed CRUs. Therefore, nanoscale RyR reorganization during heart failure augments Ca2+ leak and slows Ca2+ release kinetics, leading to weakened contraction in this disease.
Apical constriction is a cell shape change which contributes to tissue invagination, bending and folding in polarized epithelia. The process is linked to the formation of epithelial tubes, but it is still not clear how apical constriction works during tissue invagination and how it contributes to tube formation. The study investigated mechanisms behind apical constriction during tissue invagination in the Drosophila salivary gland (SG) and found that regulation of folded gastrulation expression by the Fork head transcription factor is required for apicomedial accumulation of Rho kinase and non-muscle myosin II. The study shows that apical constriction is not required for SG invagination, but rather contributes to proper tissue geometry. The compressing force generated by the supracellular myosin cable contributes to invagination in SGs with defective apical constriction. The study offers insight into the cellular processes involved in creating three-dimensional structures, and reveals that tube formation can be decoupled from tissue invagination.
Dengue virus is a major global health threat, with no broadly-effective therapy or vaccine available. The virus generates a small, non-coding RNA called sfRNA that induces cytopathicity and pathogenesis. Host cell exonuclease Xrn1 degrades the viral RNA and produces the sfRNA. The architecture of the complete Dengue 2 sfRNA includes five independently-folded RNA structures, two of which confer Xrn1 resistance. Disrupting the 3-way junction of the RNAs eliminates the buildup of disease-related sfRNAs in human cells infected with the virus. Factors like global trade and climate change exacerbate the problem since they extend the habitat of the mosquito vector that spreads the virus.
This study examines the humoral immune response to natural papillomavirus infection in a unique preclinical model, the multimammate mouse Mastomys coucha. The study found that the virus induces a strong seroconversion in its natural host early after infection, but initially raised antibodies were non-neutralizing and directed against a longer isoform of the L1 protein which is unable to assemble into viral particles. Only after a delay of around 4 months after infection, protecting antibodies against the short L1 appeared, enabling the virus to successfully establish an infection. This suggests a novel PV immune escape mechanism, which may have important implications in understanding the humoral immune response during a normal infection cycle.
This document discusses the role of out-of-plane tissue deformations in shaping plant and animal development, specifically in the example of Snapdragon flowers. By combining cellular analysis with tissue-level modeling, the authors illustrate how different patterns of growth orientations can generate out-of-plane deformations and shape the flower. They propose that tissue conflict resolution, in which heterogeneity of specified growth within the tissue leads to local rotations that reduce potential stresses, may provide a general mechanism for generating out-of-plane deformations in both plants and animals. The study also examines the role of different genes and patterns of gene activity in shaping the Snapdragon corolla, particularly in relation to dorsoventral asymmetry and flower shape.
The Ras-superfamily GTPases are important in regulating cell proliferation and morphology. Ras signaling is controlled by a system of interacting molecules, with upstream enzymes GEF/GAP regulating Ras's ability to recruit downstream effectors. A new assay has been developed to measure Ras signaling, including both upstream regulators and downstream effectors. This allows for a systematic mapping of how different network configurations shape the dynamic system response. The concentration and identity of both upstream and downstream signaling components impact the system's response. Different effectors interpret the same inputs with distinct output dynamics, enabling a Ras system to encode multiple unique temporal outputs in response to a single input. Different Ras-to-GEF positive feedback mechanisms can reshape output dynamics. The versatility comes with a trade-off of fragility, with numerous paths to altered signaling behaviors that could cause disease. A bead reconstitution assay has been developed to study how Ras systems assemble effector complexes in response to inputs. The output dynamics for many different system configurations can be measured by microscopy. The new assay provides a framework for studying the dynamics of other assembly-driven signaling systems or more complex systems that incorporate multiple interconnected signaling nodes.
Neuropeptides play a role in regulating behaviors and physiological responses, but their mechanism of action is poorly understood. This study focuses on the endocrine control of ecdysis behavior in arthropods, which sheds their cuticle at the end of each molt. The behavior is triggered by Ecdysis Triggering Hormone (ETH), and the study shows that the response of peptidergic neurons that produce crustacean cardioactive peptide (CCAP), a key target of ETH, depends on neuropeptides produced by other direct targets of ETH, autocrine influences from CCAP neurons, and inhibitory actions mediated by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). These findings shed light on how insect behavior is controlled and how neuropeptides organize neuronal activity and behaviors.
This document discusses the role of lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) in cholesterol trafficking within cells, specifically in the context of the lysosomal storage disorder Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC) disease caused by defects in the genes encoding NPC1 or NPC2. The study finds that LBPA enrichment is ineffective in NPC2-deficient cells, indicating that LBPA interaction with functional NPC2 protein is necessary for cholesterol egress from the cell compartment. The study identifies the hydrophobic knob domain of NPC2 as the site of interaction between NPC2 and LBPA. The document also explores the structure and function of NPC2 and discusses the impact of LBPA on cholesterol transfer rates in NPCs with different mutations. The document suggests that LBPA enrichment may be used to effect cholesterol egress in cells with defective NPC1 but functional WT NPC2, and NPC2 with disease-causing mutations outside the hydrophobic knob domain. Overall, the findings reveal a heretofore unknown step of intracellular cholesterol trafficking that is critically dependent upon the interaction of LBPA with functional NPC2 protein.
This study aimed to develop a multidomain prognostic model that combines resting state functional MRI with clinical characteristics to predict one-year outcomes at the single-subject level for patients with disorders of consciousness. The model discriminated between patients who would recover consciousness and those who would not with high accuracy on three datasets from two medical centers. The study suggests that the model is accurate, robust, and interpretable, and is the first reported implementation of a multidomain prognostic model based on resting state functional MRI in chronic disorders of consciousness. The availability of an accurate and robust prognostication is fundamental in the clinical management of chronic DOC patients, as medical treatment, rehabilitation therapy, and ethical decisions depend on this information.
Scientists have used deep mutational scanning to map all single amino-acid mutations to an avian influenza PB2 protein that enhances growth in human cells, identifying numerous previously uncharacterized human-adaptive mutations. These mutations cluster on the protein's surface, highlighting potential interfaces with host factors. Some of the adaptive mutations occur in avian-to-human transmission of H7N9 influenza, while others do not occur in nature because they are inaccessible via single-nucleotide mutations. Overall, the work sheds light on how viral host adaptation is shaped by selection at key molecular surfaces combined with evolutionary accessibility.
In pancreatic cancer, myeloid cells infiltrate the pancreas and promote tumor growth. However, the function of these infiltrating cells is regulated by oncogenic Kras expressed in epithelial cells. When oncogenic Kras is present, myeloid cells promote acinar dedifferentiation and carcinogenesis. However, upon inactivation of oncogenic Kras, myeloid cells promote re-differentiation of acinar cells, remodeling of the fibrotic stroma, and tissue repair. Both aspects of myeloid cell activity depend, at least in part, on activation of EGFR/MAPK signaling, with different subsets of ligands and receptors promoting carcinogenesis or repair, respectively. The cross-talk between epithelial cells and infiltrating myeloid cells determines the balance between tissue repair and carcinogenesis in the pancreas.
The mechanism by which primary cilia receive appropriate physiological signaling through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is not well-understood. This study investigated the delivery of D1-type dopamine receptors to primary cilia and found that the receptors were delivered from the plasma membrane outside cilia through a specific targeting mechanism requiring the receptor cytoplasmic tail, the intraflagellar transport complex-B, and ciliary kinesin KIF17. This targeting mechanism also depended on Rab23, a small guanine nucleotide binding protein previously not known to be essential for ciliary delivery of any cargo. The study revealed a discrete route and mechanism of ciliary GPCR targeting and identified the key role of Rab23 in the process.
Agouti-related-peptide (AgRP) neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (ARC) are necessary and sufficient for driving feeding behaviour. Optetrode electrophysiological recordings from AgRP neurons in awake, behaving mice showed that these neurons play a role in adjusting feeding behaviour at timescales ranging from hours to seconds, in response to differing degrees of caloric deficiency. The study found that a drop in AgRP spiking activity at meal onset reflects a reduction in the drive to seek food, while persistent spiking may reflect a sustained drive to consume food. The study also observed that other Arcuate neurons, inhibited by AgRP neuron photostimulation, demonstrated opposite changes in spiking.
The article discusses the effects of trimethylamine-oxide (TMAO) on the circulatory system and protection of cardiac lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) from hydrostatic pressure stress (HPS) produced by the contracting heart. Tests were conducted on male Sprague-Dawley and Spontaneously-Hypertensive-Heart-Failure (SHHF) rats treated with TMAO, and LDH was evaluated using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. TMAO-treated rats showed diuretic, natriuretic, and hypotensive effects and reduced mortality rates in SHHF rats. TMAO did not affect LDH protein structure. Some clinical studies link TMAO levels to an increased risk of cardiovascular events, but basic research studies on the effects of TMAO on the circulatory system are contradictory. The study was performed according to Directive 2010/63 EU on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes and approved by the Local Bioethical Committee in Warsaw.
The emergence of multicellularity in animals is associated with an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and an expansion of tRNA-isodecoders. This tRNA expansion leads to misselection resulting in a critical error of L-Ala mischarged onto tRNAThr, which is proofread by Animalia-specific-tRNA Deacylase (ATD). ATD is the first and only known proofreader of tRNA misselection errors. The study further provides a plausible regulatory mechanism wherein the cellular fate of tRNAs can be switched from protein biosynthesis to non-canonical functions. There exists a functional redundancy in clearing L-Ala-tRNAThr in the form of ATD and threonyl-tRNA synthetase (ThrRS). Recruitment of a new factor, ATD, even in the presence of ThrRS, suggests the importance of avoiding Thr-to-Ala mistranslation. It raises an important question as to whether this functional redundancy is important for maintaining cellular protein homeostasis during any kind of physiological or stress conditions. The editing site cysteine is prone to oxidation and this feature is conserved across Bacteria and Eukarya.
Using a high-throughput screening platform, researchers have investigated the substrate specificity of tyrosine kinases Lck and ZAP-70 that activate T cell signaling downstream of the T cell receptor. By mutating peptide substrates, bacterial surface display, cell sorting, and deep sequencing, the researchers identified specificities of the first two kinases for the T cell receptor subunit, LAT and SLP-76. The study found that ZAP-70 selects its substrates using an electrostatic mechanism that excludes those with positively-charged residues and favors LAT and SLP-76 phosphosites surrounded by negatively-charged residues, leading to the specific response of T cells to foreign antigens. The researchers also found that the inability of ZAP-70 to phosphorylate and activate itself is due to steric and electrostatic repulsion that blocks the adoption of the enzyme-substrate complex. Understanding kinase substrate specificity in T cell signaling can help to better understand the T cell response to antigens.
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital cardiovascular disease, which leads to the development of thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA). The insufficient expression of NOTCH1 is highly related to BAV-TAA, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear. A comparative proteomics analysis was used to explore the biological differences between non-diseased and BAV-TAA aortic tissues, and a microfluidics-based aorta smooth muscle-on-a-chip model was constructed to evaluate the effect. Protein analyses of human aortic tissues showed the insufficient expression of NOTCH1 and impaired mitochondrial dynamics in BAV-TAA. The study provides the first demonstration of previously undocumented roles of impairment of mitochondrial fusion in bicuspid aortopathy, which may serve as a potential pharmacological target for preventing disease progression. The aorta smooth muscle-on-a-chip model simulates the human pathophysiological parameters of aorta biomechanics and provides a platform for molecular mechanism studies of aortic disease and related drug screening.
Delamanid, an approved drug for multi-drug resistant tuberculosis, has been found to be a potent inhibitor of Leishmania donovani, the parasite that causes visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Oral dosing of delamanid at 30 mg kg-1 for five days resulted in sterile cures in a mouse model of VL. Treatment with lower doses revealed a U-shaped dose-response curve, with greater parasite suppression at 1 mg kg-1 than at 3 mg kg-1. Mechanistic studies reveal that delamanid is rapidly metabolised by parasites, but not by the nitroreductase enzyme that activates fexinidazole. The results suggest that delamanid has the potential to be repurposed as an oral therapy for VL, which would be a much-needed alternative to the currently available drugs for VL.
The document describes a proposed method for using multiple neuroimaging methods, including MEG, MRI, and fMRI, to predict age as a biomarker for brain health. The method involves a stacked model using features from each modality and a non-linear random forest regression. The study found that the combination of all three modalities resulted in the best performance for age prediction. The document also discusses the advantages of MEG over EEG for capturing brain rhythms without penetrating the skull, and the challenge of handling missing data in multimodal assessments. The proposed method offers a way to combine diverse types of brain signals and improve predictive models for clinical neuroscience.
Researchers used yeast to investigate how undifferentiated multicellularity evolved. Yeast normally use invertase to digest sucrose extracellularly but are unable to grow at low levels of cell and sucrose concentration. The researchers therefore engineered three strategies, including forming clumps, importing sucrose before hydrolysis, and increasing invertase expression. The yeast were then evolved and populations grown in a low-sucrose environment to identify which strategy was most effective. All 12 successful clones formed multicellular clumps after incomplete cell separation, 10 increased invertase expression, none imported sucrose, and 11 increased hexose transporter expression. By engineering strains and experimenting with them, the researchers could infer evolutionary strategies, and found combining rational design with experimental evolution can help evaluate hypotheses, identify genes and pathways, and find causal mutations.
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are responsible for selective transport between the nucleus and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. The permeability barrier of NPCs is formed by nucleoporin domains containing phenylalanine-glycine motifs (FG domains), which interact with nuclear transport receptors (NTRs). This paper presents a bottom-up nanoscale model using planar films produced with three different end-grafted FG domains to quantitatively analyze the binding of two different NTRs. NTR binding caused only moderate changes in film thickness, with binding isotherms showing negative cooperativity mapped onto a single master curve. The study reproduces this universal NTR binding behavior quantitatively using a physical model treating FG domains as regular, flexible polymers, and NTRs as spherical colloids with a homogeneous surface, ignoring the detailed arrangement of interaction sites along FG domains and on the NTR surface.
A protein quality control pathway called ERISQ, which restricts accumulation of excess ribosomal protein that fails to assemble into ribosomes, has been identified. The pathway involves the E2 enzymes Ubc4/Ubc5 and the ubiquitin ligase Tom1, which ubiquitinate unassembled ribosomal proteins primarily via residues concealed in mature ribosomes before they are degraded in the nucleus/nucleolus by a ubiquitin-proteasome system quality control pathway. The role of the pathway in maintaining protein homeostasis and
Researchers have shown that organs can be shaped by patterning resistance within their extracellular matrix (ECM) rather than asymmetric force generation within cells. Using Drosophila egg chambers, the researchers noted a robust mechanical anisotropy in the ECM-based basement membrane but not in the underlying epithelium. This anisotropy is instructive for tissue elongation, creating differential resistance to isotropic tissue expansion. The findings highlight a new parameter of developmental mechanics, as they reveal an unappreciated sophistication in basement membrane mechanical properties that can directly impose organ shape.
The role of NMDA receptor (NMDAR) in the wiring of adult-born granule cells (GCs) has remained unclear. This study shows that NMDARs contribute to spine formation and survival of nascent GCs lacking these receptors. Loss of NMDARs leads to elevated maturation of synapses in neonate-generated GCs and CA1 pyramidal neurons. NMDAR is required for spine gain in dendrites of newborn GCs, thereby contributing to the monitored activity-dependent establishment and maturation rate of synaptic connections between newborn neurons and others. These functions of NMDARs contribute to the experience-driven construction of circuits formed by new neurons.
The document discusses how humans and animals violate economic principles when making choices between multiple alternatives. The study focuses on a robust finding that a third option can alter the relative preference for the original alternatives. However, studies disagree on whether the third option's value decreases or increases accuracy. The paper reports four experiments with 147 human participants that found the positive effect of the third option is neither replicable nor reproducible, and instead, the third option's value captures attention and impedes accuracy. A computational model was proposed to explain the complex interplay of value, attention, and choice. The research discusses the underling mechanisms of multi-alternative choice and the conditions under which decision makers exhibit different forms of violations of independence from irrelevant alternatives (IIA).
Sarcoidosis is a disease characterized by granuloma formation and increased cytokine production. Recent research has shown that activated macrophages and T cells in sarcoidosis produce high levels of IL-1β and IL-17, and that there is an enrichment for metabolic and HIF pathways. The abundance of HIF isoforms is linked to the production of IL-1β and IL-17, and pharmacological intervention using chloroquine can modify cytokine production. Sarcoidosis predominantly affects the lungs, and studies have found increased expression of HIF isoforms in sarcoidosis AMs and monocytes compared to healthy controls. The increased expression of HIF-α isoforms suggests a role in regulating Th1/Th17-mediated inflammation in sarcoidosis.
Researchers have made the first non-invasive mapping of cerebral oxygen concentration, using measurements of capillary erythrocyte-associated transients to determine the Po2 in nearby neuropil. The microne-scale mapping was performed in awake, resting mice and any values recorded were contrasted with the results obtained under anesthesia. Results showed that interstitial Po2 has similar values in the olfactory bulb glomerular layer and the somatosensory cortex, although there are large capillary hematocrit and erythrocyte flux differences. It was discovered that awake tissue Po2 is around half that under isoflurane anesthesia, with Po2 values showing layer specific differences in the cortex which contrasted with those recorded under anesthesia.
The article discusses how Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) protein provides positional cues during development and how cell surface reception of Shh ensures that graded signal is interpreted correctly by neighboring cells. The article postulates that endocytic sorting signals regulate endocytosis of Patched1 (Ptch1) receptor protein, which is essential for clearing from primary cilia and pathway activation. The article reports that two ubiquitin E3 ligases, Smurf1 and Smurf2, recognize two 'PPXY' motifs for Ptch1 in lipid rafts in association with Shh. Smurf-mediated endocytic turnover of Ptch1 is necessary for pathway activation, and removal of Smurfs eradicates the impact of Shh on granule cell precursors. The article claims that Ptch1 internalization through endocytosis is essential for the Shh pathway activation within the negative feedback loop to precisely control the signaling output in response to Shh gradient signal.
The WormMotel is a microfabricated device used to track the behavior and aging of a large number of C. elegans worms. It addresses the limitations of current measurement methods, which are labor-intensive and low throughput, by allowing for long-term cultivation and image tracking of up to 240 worms per device. The roundworm C. elegans is a popular model organism for aging research due to its short lifespan and easily manipulable genetics. The WormMotel is capable of measuring inter-individual and inter-strain differences in behavioral decline during aging and stress, as well as understanding the relationship between behavior and lifespan. The device uses a transparent polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate containing a rectangular array of up to 240 wells, each of which is filled with standard agar media, bacterial food, and a single worm. By conforming to the ANSI standard microplate format, the method leverages existing scalable automation technology including worm sorters, robotic plate handlers, and chemical library screening tools. It can be imaged continuously or intermittently, and locomotor activity is used as a measure of health. Custom software quantifies movement of each animal in each well, yielding rich behavioral data capable of characterizing aging and development. Lifespan is determined as the final time of nonzero movement. Using standard automation tools, a system can intermittently image up to 240 plates containing 57,600 individually tracked worms. The device is scalable and is a powerful and scalable tool for analysis of C. elegans behavior and aging.
Proneural factor Ngn1 activates miR-9 expression in neurons during neurogenesis to inhibit astrogliogenesis. MiR-9 targets the Lifr-beta, Il6st (gp130) and Jak1 to inhibit Stat phosphorylation, which leads to suppression of astrogliogenesis. Overexpression of miR-9 inhibits astrogliogenesis and knockdown has the opposite effect. Ngn1 and miR-9 together inhibit astrogliogenesis and activates the neurogenic program.
A study has shown that functional and structural atypicality in local brain areas is linked to higher-order cognitive symptoms in autism. Neural information is a fundamental functional property of the local brain region, and has been quantified as temporal receptive window, temporal receptive field or intrinsic neural timescale. Intrinsic neural timescales were investigated in high-functioning adults with autism, and it was found that individuals with autism had a significantly shorter intrinsic timescale than typically developing individuals in certain brain regions, particularly in the sensory/visual cortices. These shorter intrinsic timescales were correlated with the severity of autism, whereas a longer timescale in the right caudate was associated with cognitive rigidity. These observations were confirmed from neurodevelopmental perspectives and replicated in two independent cross-sectional datasets. Moreover, the intrinsic timescale was correlated with local grey matter volume. This study shows that atypical intrinsic neural timescales should be observed in autism, and that intrinsic neural timescales are a mediator linking atypical grey matter volume and ASD symptoms.
There are few proven effective analgesics for hospitalized neonates due to ethical and experimental challenges in testing them. However, EEG-derived measures of noxious-evoked brain activity can be used to assess analgesic efficacy. The authors present an experimental paradigm to account for individual differences in noxious-evoked baseline sensitivity which can be used to improve analgesic trials in neonates. The paradigm is tested across four observational studies, with evidence for the efficacy of gentle brushing and paracetamol. By measuring and accounting for noxious-evoked baseline sensitivity, sample sizes required for analgesic trials in neonates can be reduced. The study also highlights the importance of effective pain relief in neonatal intensive care, as repeated pain exposure can cause short-term stress and long-term neurodevelopmental impact.
Researchers have assembled a reference genome for the European blackcap, an iconic migratory species, and obtained whole genome resequencing data from individuals across its breeding range. The study found evidence for divergence between migratory and resident continent birds around 30,000 years ago, with evidence for one admixture event between them around 5,000 years ago. The study identified genomic regions associated with the propensity to migrate, orientation, and distance of migration, and noted that strongly associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were located in regulatory regions of candidate genes that may serve as major regulators of the migratory syndrome. The rapidity with which migratory behavior can evolve and the potential for migration to play a role in the early stages of speciation makes the study relevant beyond the genetics of migration in the blackcap.
Researchers have identified a new factor that connects mRNA to endosomes during transportation, explaining how mRNPs are connected to shuttling vesicles. The Upa1 protein contains a FYVE protein containing a FYVE zinc finger domain for interaction with endosomal lipids and a new PAM2-like domain required for interaction with the MLLE domain of the key RNA-binding protein. Loss of this FYVE domain protein leads to specific defects in mRNA and ribosome transport without affecting general functions of endosomes or their movement. Endosomes are important membranous carriers that transport material such as lipids, proteins, and mRNAs, and emerging research indicates an intimate linkage of membrane and mRNA trafficking during spatio-temporal control of gene expression.
Researchers have discovered a new mechanism of monoallelic gene expression in the African trypanosome, Trypanosoma brucei, which can be used to link antigenic variation, cell cycle and development. The mechanism of monoallelic gene expression ensures selective expression of one protein from a pool of possible proteins. In African trypanosomes, only one variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene is expressed from a telomeric expression site (ES) at any given time. The proliferation of slender bloodstream trypanosomes can be attenuated by directionally attenuating the ES by DOT1B-mediated histone methylation. The expression of a second VSG is sufficient for this to happen. The ES attenuation can be reversed and this happens when three conserved expression-site-associated genes (ESAGs) appear to serve as signal for ES attenuation. Their depletion causes G1-phase dormancy and reversible initiation of the slender-to-stumpy differentiation pathway. ES-attenuated slender bloodstream trypanosomes gain full developmental competence for transformation to the tsetse fly stage.
The cellular prion protein (PrPC) is highly expressed in the nervous system and involved in prion diseases, as well as other neurodegenerative proteinopathies such as Alzheimer's disease. PrPC is shed from the plasma membrane by a protease, ADAM10, but the impact of this on prion disease is unclear. Using knockout mice, scientists found that depletion of ADAM10 in forebrain neurons leads to an increase in PrPC levels and also reduces the incubation times of prion diseases. However, the absence of shedding impairs the spread of prion pathology within the brain. The results suggest a dual role for ADAM10-mediated shedding and highlight the importance of proteolytic processing in neurodegeneration.
The C2B domain of Synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) acts as a calcium sensor for neurotransmitter release and has a crucial role in promoting SNARE-dependent fusion. However, the mechanism behind its function is not fully understood. In this study, it was found that the C2B domain interacts with acidic membranes and SNARE complexes simultaneously through the top calcium-binding loops, side polybasic patch, and bottom face in response to calcium. The simultaneous interactions allow the C2B domain to deform local membranes, which is important for its functional significance in vivo. The results also suggest that the local membrane deformation driven by the C2B domain is a key step for triggering fusion. Furthermore, it is shown that the two highly basic regions of the C2B domain contribute to the SNARE complex binding, whilst PI(4,5)P2 interacts with the K326 K327 region. These observations provide insights into the functional significance of the Syt1 C2B domain in neurotransmitter release.
IFIT proteins are crucial in mammalian innate antiviral immunity. The number and identity of IFIT genes can vary between species, and human and mouse IFIT1 proteins have different antiviral specificities. This study resolves this difference by showing that human and mouse IFIT1 are not orthologs, but rather paralogs that diverged over 100 million years ago. They have evolved to have distinct functions, including different antiviral specificities. The study reveals a high degree of dynamism and alternate retention of IFIT1 or IFIT1B paralogs in mammalian genomes, which may impact the spectrum of viruses that different mammalian species are capable of restricting.
The article discusses the role of Cdc7 kinase in the replication checkpoint pathway, which is important for maintaining genome integrity during replication stresses and normal growth. The Claspin-Chk1 pathway is induced during checkpoint activation, and Cdc7 is required for their interaction by phosphorylating the Chk1-binding-domain (CKBD) of Claspin. This interaction is essential for efficient checkpoint activation. Cdc7 also plays a crucial role in initiating DNA replication by phosphorylating Mcm proteins. The article highlights the dependency of Chk1 kinase activation on Cdc7 or CK1γ1 in different cell types and suggests targeting Cdc7 for cancer-specific cell killing. The AP (acidic patch) motif near the C-terminus of Claspin is required for efficient phosphorylation of Mcm proteins by Cdc7, and the DE/A mutant in this region fails to interact with Cdc7 and support checkpoint activation. Overall, the article provides insights into the mechanisms of replication checkpoint activation and the role of Cdc7 kinase in this process.
The article discusses the production of structural colors in butterflies, which result from the constructive and destructive interference of light with high refractive index materials like chitin in thin films. The study investigates the evolution and genetic regulation of butterfly scale laminae, which are simple photonic nanostructures. They found that adjusting lamina thickness plays an important role in the microevolution and macroevolution of butterfly color. A lineage of buckeye butterflies artificially selected for blue wing color showed that thickened laminae caused a color shift from brown to blue. It was also discovered that lamina thickness variation contributes to the color diversity that distinguishes sexes and species throughout the genus Junonia. Cover scale laminae are the major source of blueness in artificially selected buckeye butterfly scales, while melanic ground scales secondarily enhance spectral purity. The artificially selected buckeye butterflies rapidly evolved blue wing color via a mean increase in lamina thickness in cover scales and, possibly, a modest increase in ground scales.
The document reports on the development of a high-throughput assay for measuring olfactory behavior in response to specific stimuli in fruit flies. The study found that flies exhibit two distinct behavioral responses, an upwind run during odor (ON response) and a local search at odor offset (OFF response). Wind orientation required antennal mechanoreceptors, while search was driven solely by odor. Based on data, the study developed a navigation model that recapitulates the behavior of flies and generates realistic trajectories. The study provides a foundation for dissecting neural circuits contributing to olfactory behavior.
The bacterium Vibrio parahaemolyticus uses bile as a signal to activate the type III secretion system 2 (T3SS2), which causes gastroenteritis. The bacterium uses a receptor called VtrA/VtrC to bind to bile salts and activate T3SS2. The crystal structure of the VtrA/VtrC heterodimer reveals a hydrophobic inner chamber, which binds to bile salts. Deleting vtrC completely abolished the activation of T3SS2 by bile salts.
Phytochromes are photoreceptors that regulate growth and development in plants, and a new study has identified a novel signaling pathway downstream of the far-red light-sensing phytochrome, phyA, that depends on the CCR4-NOT complex. NOT9B, an Arabidopsis homologue of human CNOT9, is a component of the CCR4-NOT complex and acts as a negative regulator of phyA-specific light signaling when bound to NOT1. Light-activated phyA interacts with and displaces NOT9B from NOT1, suggesting a potential mechanism for light signaling through CCR4-NOT. Furthermore, association with nuclear-localized ARGONAUTE 1 raises the possibility that NOT9B and CCR4-NOT are involved in phyA-modulated gene expression. Plants use a set of photoreceptors to sense the spectral composition and measure the light intensity in the environment, and phytochromes are receptors for red and far-red light. They are located in the cytosol in the inactive state and translocate into the nucleus upon conversion to the active Pfr state. Two well-characterized signaling pathways link light-activation of phytochromes to gene regulation, but factors involved in splicing or microRNA biogenesis also modulate light responses. Recent findings describe the CCR4-NOT complex as a major player in mRNA metabolism in eukaryotes, and this study reveals an unexpected role of the Arabidopsis CCR4-NOT complex in light signaling. NOT9B acts as a repressor of early seedling development during the dark-to-light transition and is a component of this evolutionary conserved complex, but has a very specific role in phyA-regulated photomorphogenesis. In summary, this study sheds light on the complex network of signaling pathways involved in plant growth and development in response to light.
The protocadherin alpha (Pcdha) gene cluster plays a role in regulating neuronal migration during cortical development and cytoskeletal dynamics in primary cortical culture through the WAVE (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome family verprolin homologous protein, also known as Wasf) complex. Overexpression of the proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2), a non-receptor cell-adhesion kinase and scaffold protein downstream of Pcdhα, impairs cortical neuron migration via inactivation of the small GTPase Rac1. Pcdhα proteins are expressed throughout the developing forebrain, and knockdown of Pcdhα genes results in a significant decrease of migrating neurons in the cortical plate and defects in multipolar migration, suggesting that Pcdhα is required for migration of immature cortical neurons. Pcdhα controls cortical neuron migration through the WAVE complex and negative regulation of the Pyk2 kinase.
Researchers have discovered that when a rodent runs through a maze to different destinations, the hippocampal place cells fire at different rates. However, it was unclear whether this firing represented the animal's intended destination or the execution of a specific trajectory. An experiment was done with rats where they were trained to navigate from a start box to three goal locations via four partially overlapping routes. Of the cells that fired on two overlapping routes to the same goal location, 95.8% showed route-dependent firing, whereas only two cells (4.2%) showed goal-dependent firing. This means that place cell firing on overlapping routes reflects the animal's route, not its goals, and that this firing may aid spatial discrimination.
The study investigates the effect of perturbing the satellite cell (SC) niche microenvironment on embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) subtypes. Results show that selective perturbation of the SC niche results in distinct sarcoma subtypes in a Pax7 lineage-dependent manner, with HGF-mediated SC niche perturbation promoting ERMS that originate from satellite cells. The study also highlights the difference between ERMS and ARMS subtypes in terms of mutational load and suggests the use of combination therapy as a possible solution to resistance emerging from sarcoma heterogeneity. Bioinformatic analyses provide a basis to investigate the functional relationship between the HGF/Met axis and the SC niche in RMS initiation and maintenance. The Muscle Creatine Kinase-driven tTA promoter is used to conditionally modulate transgenic Hgf and eGFP expression to generate a model of ERMS based on SC niche perturbation (MH), which shows that SC niche perturbation results in satellite cells activation.
The ability to record cell-cell interactions is important for understanding development, homeostasis, and disease, especially in cancer where interactions between cancer and stromal cells play a major role. A GFP-based system called G-baToN has been developed that allows for sensitive and specific labeling of cells after cell-cell interactions, enabling the tracking of physically interacting cells and accelerating our understanding of the outputs of cell-cell interactions in cancer and other biological processes. G-baToN is a generalizable system that enables physical contact-based labeling between various human and mouse cell types, including endothelial cell-pericyte, neuron-astrocyte, and diverse cancer-stromal cell pairs. The system can also be extended to additional antigen/antibody pairs, and combinations of orthogonal systems can enable reciprocal labeling and detection of higher order multi-cellular interactions.
The document discusses the advantages of generating recombinant monoclonal antibodies (R-mAbs) from hybridomas for biomedical research. The authors report the creation of a library of validated R-mAbs for neuroscience research, which were generated by cloning immunoglobulin G (IgG) variable domains from cryopreserved hybridoma cells and inputting them into an integrated pipeline for expression and validation. The method was also employed to rescue IgG variable sequences and generate functional R-mAbs from non-viable cryopreserved hybridomas. The authors also discuss the benefits of R-mAbs over polyclonal antibodies from antisera and the advantages of cloning R-mAbs as plasmid DNA, as well as the ability to engineer R-mAbs for subclass-specific secondary antibody binding specificity, making them useful in simultaneous multiplex labeling experiments not previously possible.
This study looks at chemosensory neurons in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which extract information about chemical cues from the environment and transform this activity into behaviour. Using functional imaging, the researchers identified a combinatorial code of activity across multiple sensory neurons that is essential to drive plasticity in an animal's behaviour to the BZ odour. They found that the primary neurons AWCON and AWA directly detect the food odour benzaldehyde (BZ) and release insulin-like peptides and acetylcholine, respectively, which are required for the odour-evoked responses in the secondary neurons ASEL and AWB. Both primary and secondary neurons are required for BZ attraction. The combinatorial code is altered in aged animals, where experimental manipulations increasing neurotransmission from primary neurons rescues ageing-associated neuronal deficits. The results suggest reduced neurotransmission as a novel mechanism driving ageing-associated sensory neural activity and behavioural declines. The study also shows how odours are encoded by primary and secondary neurons, and olfactory circuit function is correlated with an animal's longevity.
The study analyzes RNA-seq data from human macrophages exposed to different stimuli and distinguishes between promoters, splicing, and 3ʹ end usage to understand their contribution to complex traits. The study uses different quantification methods and compares genetic associations across multiple genomic annotations. The study finds that promoter usage might be an under-appreciated molecular mechanism mediating complex trait associations in a context-specific manner. The study also shows that different quantification methods capture complementary sets of genetic associations and are enriched in different genomic annotations, suggesting the distinct mechanisms controlling transcript usage.
The HIV-1 protein, Vpu, downregulates the antiviral protein BST2/tetherin by hijacking the clathrin-dependent trafficking pathways. Vpu interacts with both BST2 and the clathrin adaptor protein complex 1 (AP1) through its cytoplasmic domains. This interaction with AP1 allows Vpu to mistraffick BST2 by retaining it in juxtanuclear endosomes and stimulating its degradation in lysosomes. The mechanism by which Vpu antagonizes BST2 involves multiple pathways, including both degradation and mistrafficking within the endosomal system. The study also suggests that Vpu has evolved to associate with multiple subunits of AP1, potentially allowing it to modulate the cellular trafficking machinery to target other host proteins.
The structure of the complete functional assembly responsible for regulating and executing site-specific DNA recombination has been visualized for the first time by scientists. The 240-bp Holliday junction (HJ) is bound specifically by 11 protein subunits that are responsible for the regulation of the excision of bacteriophage λ viral DNA out of the E .coli host chromosome. This is one of the most thoroughly characterized pathways for the rearrangement of DNA, by homologous or site-specific recombination and transposition, which is a fundamental feature of evolution, genetic variation, and gene regulation. The scientists have provided a structural basis for the pre-existing data describing the excisive and integrative recombination pathways, and they help explain their regulation.
Researchers have found that miR-9, an evolutionarily conserved microRNA that is highly expressed in the brains of vertebrates, may play a crucial role in vocal communication by affecting basal ganglia function. It was found that the overexpression of miR-9 in juvenile zebra finches significantly impair their developmental vocal learning and song performance in adulthood. The results also suggest that dysregulation of miR-9 in humans may contribute to language impairments and related neurodevelopmental disorders. The study furthermore found that miR-9 regulates the expression of FOXP1 and FOXP2, genes that are associated with neural developmental disorders, including speech and language impairments.
This document describes a study of the hippocampal lobes in rats to explore whether they convey similar or different activities and how they cooperate. The study found that bilateral Schaffer gamma waves are generally larger and lead from the right hemisphere with only moderate covariation of amplitude and drive CA1 pyramidal units more strongly than unilateral waves. CA3 waves lock to the ipsilateral Schaffer potentials, although bilateral coherence was weak. The findings suggest that interhippocampal connections integrate different aspects of information that flow through the left and right lobes. The study also suggests some degree of integration and cooperation between the two lobes. The paper describes the experimental setup and details of the study, including the extraction of pathway-specific local field potentials (LFPs) using spatial discrimination methods.
The study focuses on the behavior of Caenorhabditis elegans, a nematode that uses random search to locate undetectable food. Researchers developed a mathematical model of random search from C. elegans connectome and analyzed the behavior of the nematode at submicron resolution. Results predict the effects of genetic perturbations and neuronal ablations on nematode behavior. The model implies that random search in C. elegans can be understood in terms of a neuronal flip-flop circuit with reciprocal inhibition between two populations of stochastic neurons. The study provides a theoretical framework for understanding locomotion in C. elegans and a model that may be applied to other organisms.
Research has revealed that signaling between the developing muscles responsible for powering the wings of Drosophila flies and the dorsal air sacs, which help to oxygenate the muscles, is mediated by cytonemes. These link myoblasts to the air sac primordium (ASP) and to disc cells, enabling myoblasts to relay signaling between the disc and the ASP. Two signaling systems, 'Wg-Fz' and 'Notch-Dl', play a central role in ASP development. The myoblasts which produce the flight muscles grow in close proximity to the ASP and the physical associations between these and other systems are intimate. The research demonstrates the utility of cytonemes in Wg and Notch signaling, as well as the importance of a signal relay system in myoblasts.
The assembly of the human DNA polymerase holoenzyme, specifically the regulation of how clamp loaders catalyze both the loading and removal of sliding clamps onto DNA, have been a mystery until recently. Using fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) to monitor protein-DNA interactions, assembly of the human holoenzyme was found to occur stepwise. The clamp loader loads a sliding clamp onto a primer/template junction, but remains transiently bound to the DNA. PCNA re-engages with RFC and is unloaded. In the presence of polymerase, loaded PCNA is captured from DNA-bound RFC, which dissociates from the DNA to leave behind the holoenzyme. The unloading activity of RFC maximizes the utilization of PCNA, inhibiting the build-up of free PCNA on DNA in the absence of polymerase, and recycles limited PCNA to keep up with ongoing replication.
Flowering plants use small RNA molecules to guide DNA methyltransferases to genomic sequences through the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway. This pathway targets euchromatic transposable elements, but is recruited by methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me), a hallmark of heterochromatin. However, it is unknown how RdDM targets euchromatin despite an affinity for H3K9me. A recent study shows that loss of histone H1 enhances heterochromatic RdDM, but surprisingly, this does not require SHH1, the RdDM component that binds H3K9me. H3K9me is also shown to be dispensable for RdDM, as is CG DNA methylation. H1 enforces the separation of euchromatic and heterochromatic DNA methylation pathways by excluding the sRNA-generating branch of RdDM from non-CG-methylated heterochromatin. Overall, this study sheds light on how two types of silent TE chromatin are distinguished and kept separate within the nucleus of flowering plants.
Scientists have discovered that bone marrow stem cells contribute to fibrosis in various organs, and also trigger the onset of autoimmune disease by activating host T cells, according to research on mice. The study also found that once immune systems had been triggered by mismatched bone marrow stem cells, the systems were not donor-dependent. This sheds new light on the pathogenesis of systemic fibrosis in diseases such as systemic sclerosis or Sjogren's syndrome involving exocrine glands, and offers hope for treatments and new understanding.
New research has identified a role for glia in regulating energy homeostasis in mice. Glia are traditionally thought of as passive support elements in the brain, but the researchers discovered that selective activation of glial cells in the mouse arcuate nucleus (ARC) led to increased food intake. Disrupting calcium signalling pathways in ARC glia reduced food intake. The researchers used designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDS) technology to selectively activate glia in vivo. The work also involved studying agouti-related protein/neuropeptide Y-expressing neurons and pro-opiomelanocortin-expressing neurons in the ARC, in order to isolate the glia effect. The findings open up many questions, including how glia might functionally interact with neuropeptides and how manipulation of glia in ARC affects feeding behaviour.
HAC1 is a gene that encodes a transcription factor which is the central effector of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in budding yeast. When the UPR is inactive, HAC1 mRNA is stored as an unspliced isoform in the cytoplasm and no Hac1 protein is detectable. Intron removal is necessary and sufficient to release the post-transcriptional silencing of HAC1 mRNA, preventing the accumulation of Hac1 protein. The precise mechanism by which the intron prevents Hac1 protein accumulation has remained unknown until now. A combination of inhibited translation initiation and accelerated protein degradation, both dependent on the intron, prevents the accumulation of Hac1 protein when the UPR is inactive. The new mechanism provides a mechanistic understanding of HAC1 regulation and reveals a novel strategy for complete post-transcriptional silencing of a cytoplasmic mRNA.
Researchers have discovered a link between the cell cycle and pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Pluripotency transcription programs governed by core transcription factors (CTFs) may be reset during the M/G1 transition to maintain ESC pluripotency, though it is not clear how CTFs are regulated during cell cycle progression. The study found that the Aurkb-PP1 axis regulates the transcription factor Oct4 during the cell cycle, and that Oct4 contains an Aurkb phosphorylation residue (S229) and a PP1 binding motif (RVXF) in its homeodomain. Aurkb phosphorylates Oct4 (S229) during G2/M phase, leading to the dissociation of Oct4 from chromatin, whereas PP1 binds Oct4 and dephosphorylates Oct4 (S229) during M/G1 transition, which resets Oct4-driven transcription for pluripotency and the cell cycle. Mutating the Aurkb-phosphorylation residue S229 and the PP1-binding residue F271 of Oct4 in ESCs led to a significant loss of pluripotency and altered the cell cycle. The researchers propose that the spatiotemporal regulation of Oct4 by the Aurkb-PP1 axis during the cell cycle is critical for resetting pluripotency and cell-cycle genes in determining the identity of ESCs.
The coding strategies used by cell populations during learning remain mysterious, despite extensive examination at the single neuron level. In macaque area V4, a single-session form of perceptual learning was explored while recording multiple single units and LFP responses. It was found that an increase in behavioural performance during learning is predicted by tight coordination of spike timing with local population activity. More spike-LFP theta synchronization was correlated with higher learning performance. The findings reveal a novel mechanism of plasticity in visual cortex. It was also found that learning does not influence individual neuron responses and LFPs in a significant manner.
Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are innate-like, antibacterial cells that cross inflamed endothelium and display selectin ligands, with high expression of FUT7, ST3GAL4, and CBBPδ. Knockdown of C/EBPδ reduced expression of selectin ligands and CCR6, which is required for optimal rolling and arrest of these cells on activated endothelial cells. However, knocking down C/EBPδ had no separate effect on the final and critical step of transendothelial migration, which depended on CCR2. MAIT cells selectively and highly express C/EBPδ, which contributes to the expression of glycosyltransferases/selectin ligands as well as CCR6 on MAIT cells, allowing for efficient extravasation across inflamed endothelium.
The Presenilin 1 (PS1) protein is responsible for the final enzymatic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP), leading to the generation of beta-amyloid (Aβ), which is strongly linked to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. PS1 knock-in mice carrying familial AD mutations exhibit decreased Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels but increased Aβ42/40 ratio and accelerated Aβ deposition, indicating that up-regulation of the Aβ42/40 ratio has a strong impact on Aβ deposition and AD pathogenesis. Previous studies have shown that conformational changes in PS1 are tightly linked to changes of the Aβ42/40 ratio, suggesting that modulation of the pathogenic ‘closed’ PS1 conformation is a potential target for AD treatment. In this study, the researchers show that Ca2+-increased PKA activity leads to phosphorylation of PS1 at specific residues, inducing the PS1 pathogenic ‘closed’ conformation, through FRET-based imaging and antibody-based FRET assays. These results can help to develop molecular targets for AD prevention.
The article presents a study that tests the hypothesis that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) contributes to visually guided locomotor gait modifications by estimating object location relative to the body state, particularly the changing gap between them. The researchers recorded neuronal activity from areas 5b and 7 of the PPC of cats walking on a treadmill and stepping over a moving obstacle. They found distinct populations of neurons in the PPC, primarily in area 5b, that signaled distance- or time-to-contact with the obstacle, regardless of which limb was the first to step over the obstacle. The study suggests that the PPC makes an essential contribution to the process of avoiding or intercepting obstacles in cluttered environments. The researchers propose that the onset of discharge activity occurred at a constant distance-to-contact (DTC) or constant time-to-contact (TTC), identifying two populations of cells related to gap closure. The study confirms the hypothesis and emphasizes the essential role of the PPC in planning gait modifications for obstacle avoidance.
A two-sample Mendelian randomization study was conducted to investigate the causal effect of lipid-lowering drugs on COVID-19 outcomes, using genetic instruments to proxy drug exposure. The study found a potential protective effect of HMGCR inhibitors against COVID-19 hospitalization, and positive associations were found for the increased expression of HMGCR in blood with COVID-19 susceptibility and hospitalization. Suggestive evidence was also observed for the negative association between PCSK9 expression and COVID-19 susceptibility, and between HMGCR-mediated LDL cholesterol and the risk of COVID-19 hospitalization. No significant association was found for NPC1L1-mediated LDL cholesterol and COVID-19 outcomes. The study demonstrated that lipid-lowering drugs may have a protective effect against COVID-19 and facilitates further exploration of the role of lipid metabolism in viral infections.
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control many aspects of post-transcriptional gene regulation and play a key role in neuronal migration, axon outgrowth, and axon guidance during neural development. In a recent study, an in vivo RNAi screen was carried out in dorsal spinal cord interneurons to assess the functional significance of RBPs during neural development. The NOVA family of RBPs was found to play a crucial role in neuronal migration, axon outgrowth, and axon guidance by regulating the alternative splicing of Dcc (deleted in colorectal carcinoma), which was found to be important for attracting axons to the Netrin-secreting midline. By demonstrating that Dcc alternative splicing is important for gene function and controlled by NOVA, the study highlights the importance of alternative splicing in neuronal differentiation, neuronal migration, axon growth and guidance, and synapse formation and function. The study also lists alternative splicing events of other axon guidance molecules and the splicing factors responsible for generating protein variants for these molecules.
Researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the human spinal cord shows resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), similar to that of the brain. By adapting techniques used for brain imaging studies, the team found low-frequency BOLD fluctuations between left and right ventral and dorsal horns. Significant connections were also demonstrated between other areas of the spinal cord. The findings provide insight into the execution and maintenance of sensory and motor functions and may lead to improved treatment of conditions such as spinal cord injuries and multiple sclerosis.
The formation of the vertebrate skeleton and associated musculature during embryonic development relies on the regulated segmentation of mesodermal tissue, known as somitogenesis, which is controlled by a molecular oscillator called the segmentation clock. This clock is defined by cyclic gene expression within pre-somitic mesoderm (PSM) tissue with a period that regulates somite formation. Previous models of the clock predicted that the oscillation period depended on negative feedback loops and inhibitor half-lives. The current study developed a mathematical model that explored the possibility that positive feedback also played a role in determining the period of clock oscillations. The study found that tight control of the turnover of positive as well as negative regulators of the clock determines its periodicity. In particular, increasing the half-life of the positive regulator, Notch intracellular domain (NICD), leads to elevated NICD levels and an increase in the oscillation period. This was demonstrated through pharmacological testing, which delayed the phase patterns of a clock gene in chick and mouse PSM, and showed that this phenotype was accompanied by elevated levels and a prolonged half-life of NICD. Reducing NICD production rescued these effects. These findings suggest that positive feedback, mediated by Notch and NICD, plays a role in the clock mechanism, in addition to negative feedback regulation.
Scientists have identified a feedback mechanism that controls regeneration and tumorigenesis in the intestine of fruit flies. The study found that Sox21a, a group B Sox protein, is expressed in enteroblasts, a committed progenitor, to promote enterocyte differentiation. When Sox21a mutants were used, enteroblasts were unable to divide or differentiate properly and produced increased levels of mitogens which acted as paracrine signals promoting intestinal stem cell proliferation. This led to a feedback amplification loop causing the rapid production of differentiation-defective enteroblasts and tumorigenesis. Sox21a is downregulated temporarily in enteroblasts in normal intestines following damage, allowing the activation of the ISC-EB amplification loop for epithelial repair. A feedback amplification loop between stem cells and their progeny could be a common mechanism underlying tissue regeneration and tumorigenesis, the authors suggest.
The study explores the adaptive coordination of the vocal apparatus, muscles, nervous system, and social interaction in vocal development using a quantitative framework based on optimal control theory and Waddington’s landscape metaphor. Using a biomechanical model of the marmoset monkey vocal apparatus and behavioral developmental data, the study shows that the combination of the developing vocal tract, vocal apparatus muscles, and nervous system can account for the patterns of vocal development. The study uses optimal control theory and a Waddington-like developmental landscape to model the process of vocal development, focusing specifically on the production of mature contact calls. The study presents a step-by-step inferential process using the vocalization data, cost function, and optimal control theory to explain the pattern of vocal development, starting with the establishment of a biomechanical model for the vocalizations produced by developing marmoset monkeys. The study shows that the vocal tract plays an important role in shaping the acoustic features present in both immature and mature vocalizations, and that the increase in vocal tract length over development can explain the observed reduction in the dominant frequency of vocalizations.
Ant colonies have a unique ability to avoid traffic jams at high density, even though bidirectional movement is common in their collective movements. The study found that ants adjust their speed and avoid interactions at high densities, preventing time-consuming collisions that may cause congestion. These findings offer insights into how ant colonies can sustain the efficient flow of individuals, which can help engineers design better transportation systems. Additionally, the study provides a basis for future investigations into how other organisms, such as pedestrains, insects, and migrating animals, may be able to self-regulate collective movements.
Researchers have demonstrated that cortical Dynein-Dynactin-NuMA clusters act as the core spindle-pulling machinery that efficiently captures astral microtubules and generates cooperative pulling forces to position the mitotic spindle, according to a paper published in eLife. Astral microtubules are required for spindle pulling by the light-induced cortical DDN complex, as demonstrated when they were selectively disrupted by treatment with nocodazole or stabilised with taxol. Additionally, ciliobrevin D was used as a specific dynein inhibitor, which inhibited dynein’s microtubule gliding and ATPase activity, but not the association between ADP-bound dynein and microtubules in vitro. The researchers found that light-induced NuMA not only recruits, but also activates dynein at the cell cortex to generate cortical pulling forces.
Recent studies have shown that deficient goal-directed control is linked to several disorders, including obsessive-compulsive disorder and addiction. This suggests that there may be broader issues with psychiatric diagnostic categories. Researchers conducted two large-scale online assessments of psychiatric symptoms and neurocognitive performance in the general population, finding that deficits in goal-directed control were most strongly associated with a symptom dimension comprising compulsive behavior and intrusive thought. This association was highly specific when compared to other non-compulsive aspects of psychopathology. This new methodology highlights the potential of a biologically-grounded, dimensional approach to psychiatry research.
The document discusses the use of statistical methods such as binning and linear regression to analyze large datasets in biology, particularly in the context of single-cell data and cellular growth. The authors propose that data analysis and interpretation should be done in the context of a generative model to validate statistical methods and ensure consistent inferences about biological mechanisms. They emphasize the importance of considering intrinsic biological noise as a source of fluctuations in data and highlight some of the pitfalls and challenges of handling single-cell data. They discuss the growth of E. coli as an example where the commonly assumed exponential growth may not hold and illustrate the limitations of binning and linear regression in inferring growth modes from experimental data. They propose a generative model that considers growth to be exponential with normally distributed growth rates and discuss the use of this model in analyzing synthetic data where linear regression fails to distinguish between exponential and non-exponential growth modes. They emphasize the necessity of generative models in guiding and validating data analysis methods for single-cell data and their potential implications for understanding cell regulation mechanisms.
This study investigates the electrical properties of neurons in Xenopus tadpole midbrain over development and due to visual stimulation. The dataset collected from 155 deep-layer, retinorecipient tectal cells across developmental stages 43 to 49 measured between 9 to 33 different electrophysiological variables in each cell (median of 26 variables per cell) to understand the electrophysiological variability of tectal neurons in the context of development while undergoing homeostatic change. The results showed that electrophysiological diversity and functional differentiation of cells decrease after sensory stimulation, while the amount of cross-correlations between cell properties increase after patterned stimulation as a result of homeostatic plasticity. Additionally, tectal neurons with similar spiking profiles often have strikingly different electrophysiological properties, and changes in intrinsic excitability during development and sensory stimulation mediated by different mechanisms. These results provide a framework for further studies of network maturation in Xenopus tadpoles.
The Polo-like kinase (Plk) family plays a critical role in cell cycle regulation during muscle development and regeneration. Plk1 is particularly important in the proliferation and survival of myogenic cells, both embryonic myoblasts and adult muscle satellite cells (MuSCs). Deletion of Plk1 in embryonic myoblasts leads to developmental failure and prenatal lethality, while postnatal deletion in MuSCs impairs regeneration. Plk1-null MuSCs accumulate DNA damage and ultimately apoptose, while inhibition of p53 promotes their survival. Pharmacological inhibition of Plk1 blocks muscle regeneration, highlighting its indispensable role. Overall, Plk1 expression is dynamically regulated in MuSCs during their quiescence, activation, proliferation, and differentiation.
Mutations in the presenilin genes (PSEN1 and PSEN2) cause most cases of familial Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Mutations in the C. elegans gene encoding a PSEN homolog, sel-12, result in mitochondrial metabolic defects that promote neurodegeneration as a result of oxidative stress. Sel-12 mutants have elevated endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling, leading to increased mitochondrial superoxide production. By reducing ER Ca2+ release, mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake, or mitochondrial superoxides, researchers were able to rescue the mitochondrial metabolic defects and prevent neurodegeneration. These data suggest that mutations in PSEN alter mitochondrial metabolic function via ER to mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling and provide insight for alternative targets for treating neurodegenerative diseases.
The spliceosome is a large, complex molecular machine responsible for removing introns from pre-mRNA, and as such is essential for effective gene expression in eukaryotic cells. Assembly of the spliceosome involves U-rich small nuclear RNA complexes binding to the 5' splice site and the intron branch site, and then identifying the correct boundaries of the intron to be removed. To understand this process more fully, the authors used single molecule fluorescence technology to observe how U1 and BBP proteins interact with RNA in the earliest spliceosome precursor, known as E complex, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Their data revealed a mechanism by which U1 binds to the 5' splice site, and also demonstrated that E complex is a dynamic structure that allows frequent redefinition of the splice sites, facilitating recruitment and retention of U1 on introns. The authors also found that the strength of the splice site sequence greatly influenced the interactions, as did the presence of E complex proteins.
Cell migration requires the assembly and disassembly of focal adhesions, which in turn depend on the phosphorylation of focal adhesion proteins, including Cas. However, Cas phosphorylation stimulates adhesion turnover, so how does this allow for adhesion assembly? A new study shows that a protein called suppressor of cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6), along with Cullin 5, inhibits Cas-dependent focal adhesion turnover at the front of migrating epithelial cells, providing a new level of spatio-temporal control over cell migration. Interestingly, the CRL5SOCS6 ubiquitin ligase mechanism has also shown to regulate fibroblast growth factor response.
A comprehensive study has been conducted to evaluate the impact of phospholipid unsaturation on the mechanical activities of dynamin and endophilin. The study found that phospholipids with two polyunsaturated fatty acids are prone to vesiculation but highly permeable. This study is important because it sheds light on the importance of the omega-6/omega-3 ratio on neuronal functions. The study also found that membranes with symmetric polyunsaturated phospholipids are more hydrated than membranes with asymmetric saturated-unsaturated phospholipids, which influences fluorescence of polarity-sensitive dyes at the membrane interface. The research shows that the combination of an sn1 saturated acyl chain and an sn2 polyunsaturated acyl chain solves the conundrum between making a membrane very permissive to vesiculation while maintaining a proper control of membrane permeability.
Dragonflies change their eye-catching body color for visual signaling and environmental adaptation but the biochemical properties associated are unknown. In this study, the authors investigated the UV-reflective abdominal wax of dragonflies and identified very long-chain methyl ketones and aldehydes, as unique and major wax components. Chemical analyses show that this UV-reflective surface wax responsible for overall reflectance is produced by fractal surface structures consisting of randomly arranged fine wax platelets. Notably, chemically synthesized 2-pentacosanone, the main UV-reflective wax component identified from the dorsal abdomen of mature males of Orthetrum albistylum, can be used for biomimetics.
Researchers have identified a gene cluster found in a bacterium commonly found in the human gut microbiome that is responsible for inactivating the heart medication digoxin. The cluster contains a single gene, Cgr2, which is widespread and conserved in the human population. The researchers found that Cgr2 is a novel oxygen-sensitive reductase that requires flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and at least one [4Fe-4S] cluster, and is highly specific, only accepting digoxin and other cardenolides. The findings could enhance understanding of how the human body metabolises xenobiotics, including environmental toxins and drugs, and open up new avenues for diagnosis and co-therapies.
Scientists have developed a simple, cost-effective and remotely accessible method to monitor freshwater ecosystems using portable nanopore sequencing technology. The process involves targeted DNA amplification and nanopore full-length sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene to classify bacterial species in surface water samples. The method was tested on samples taken from the River Cam in Cambridge, UK, and was found to be effective in depicting the hydrological core microbiome and identifying seasonal changes in bacterial composition. The method also indicated the presence of potentially harmful pathogens and proved a useful tool in water quality monitoring.
The function of AMPA receptors (AMPAR) is controlled by auxiliary subunits, including CKAMP44. A study has identified three more proteins, CKAMP39, CKAMP52, and CKAMP59, that interact with AMPARs and together with CKAMP44, form a new family of auxiliary subunits. Despite their structural similarities, each subunit had a different impact on AMPAR gating. CKAMP39 expression was found in the cerebellum and olfactory bulb, CKAMP52 in the cerebellum and septum, and CKAMP59 in the cortex and olfactory bulb, with all being exclusively expressed in the brain. All CKAMP family members bind to GluA1 and GluA2, modifying AMPAR-mediated currents in heterologous expression systems. They all have an extracellular cystine-knot domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain, but each has a unique function.
A meta-analysis of 603 rodent studies on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) found that weight loss and alleviation of insulin resistance consistently improved NAFLD. Many drug classes that do not affect weight in humans caused weight loss in animals, and the magnitude of the treatment effect was influenced by other study design variables, such as age of animals and dietary composition. The findings help explain the challenge of reproducibility and translation within the field of metabolism. The study also found publication bias may have increased effect estimates by 37-79%. NAFLD is a complex chronic disease without any established therapies, and animal models are a major field of research. There is a translational gap between preclinical studies and subsequent outcomes in humans due to factors such as bias in study design, insufficiently powered preclinical studies, and biological differences between species. There are currently no approved pharmacological therapies for NAFLD, but several phase three trials are ongoing.
The document describes a new method for inferring gene regulation functions (GRFs) for target genes in the cell cycle of yeast, using natural changes in cellular gene expression. The approach involves constructing a parameterized model of how transcription factors determine mRNA output, then deducing possible models for a transcriptional cell cycle oscillator and testing their capability to generate oscillations without cyclin-CDK activity. The method is applicable not only to genes with single input signals but also to some cases of combinatorial regulation. The study focuses on the CLB2 gene cluster, which is expressed during the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, and the regulatory inputs include Fkh2, Ndd1, and Fkh1. The approach may be extended to quantitatively describe other gene regulatory systems such as stress response mechanisms, apoptosis, or cell differentiation networks.
The article discusses the evolution of non-reproductive workers in eusocial species and the selective forces that determine their emergence and stability. The authors provide a detailed analysis of the effects of recessive and dominant sterility alleles in offspring of a colony's queen, and refute the widely held belief that non-reproductive workers can only evolve in polyandrous species. They derive precise conditions for natural selection to favor the evolution of non-reproductive workers, and provide a model of competition between worker-laid and queen-laid male eggs in haplodiploid species. The authors conclude that haplodiploidy can have either a positive or negative influence on the evolution of helping depending on colony variables, and argue that worker altruism should not evolve with any number of matings of the queen unless non-reproductive workers provide some benefit to the colony. They derive exact conditions for the invasion and stability of non-reproductive workers and study the evolution of a non-reproductive worker caste in the context of haplodiploid genetics.
RNA-DNA hybrids can cause genome instability in yeast and mammals. The article reports that in yeast mutants defective for transcription repression and RNA degradation, hybrid formation requires Rad51p and Rad52p, which normally promote DNA-DNA strand exchange in homologous recombination. Furthermore, Rad51p mediates hybridization of transcripts to homologous chromosomal loci distinct from their site of synthesis. This hybrid formation in trans amplifies the genome-destabilizing potential of RNA and broadens the exclusive co-transcriptional models that pervade the field. The deleterious hybrid-forming activity of Rad51p is counteracted by Srs2p, a known Rad51p antagonist. Thus Srs2p serves as a novel anti-hybrid mechanism in vivo. The article suggests that RNA polymerase, which generates negative supercoiling behind the elongating polymerase, may also be a promoter of hybrid formation. The article demonstrates that induced hybrid formation using the GAL1-10 promoter in the yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) leads to hybrid-mediated genome instability under the control of Rad51p.
The role of the immune receptor SLAMF6 in immune modulation has remained unclear. This study used Pmel-1 mice bred with SLAMF6 -/- mice to generate CD8+ T cells lacking SLAMF6 and expressing a transgenic TCR for the melanoma antigen. Activated Pmel-1xSLAMF6 -/- CD8+ T cells displayed improved polyfunctionality and strong tumor cytolysis, resulting in lasting tumor regression in mice. SLAMF6 was found to act as an inhibitory checkpoint receptor whose absence allows powerful CD8+ T cells to eradicate tumors. The study also found that SLAMF6 homotypic interactions may involve receptors on the same-cell population or interactions in trans between effector T cells and SLAMF6-expressing antigen-presenting targets.
A new study has found that the prehistoric hominid Ardipithecus ramidus had a foot most similar to living chimpanzee and gorilla species. This suggests that the precursor to human bipedalism was African ape-like terrestrial quadrupedalism and climbing. The study used evolutionary modeling and ancestral state estimation methods to infer the evolutionary history of foot proportions in the anthropoid clade and implicated homoplasy in the evolution of anthropoid foot proportions. The findings challenge conventional understandings of ape and human ancestry and offer new insights into how bipedalism evolved.
Hybrid sterility is a common phenomenon observed in many sexually reproducing species, and it enforces speciation by restricting gene flow between related taxa. In mice, the only known vertebrate hybrid-sterility gene is Prdm9, which causes infertility in male hybrids. The failure of meiotic chromosome synapsis is a significant factor leading to hybrid sterility. In this study, the researchers investigated the relationship between meiotic chromosome asynapsis, intersubspecific heterozygosity, and male infertility in PB6F1 hybrids where they inserted consubspecific homology on several autosomal pairs. The study found that chromosome synapsis was restored in the presence of 27Mb or more of consubspecific sequence, and the reversal of hybrid sterility was accomplished by targeted suppression of asynapsis in the four most asynapsis-sensitive chromosomes. Overall, the study highlights the chromosomal basis of Prdm9-directed hybrid male infertility as an alternative explanation to the widely accepted concept of hybrid sterility driven by multiple genic incompatibilities.
In a study, researchers discovered that the protein encoded by human PGBD5, the most conserved transposable element-derived gene in vertebrates, can cause cut-and-paste DNA transposition in human cells. PGBD5's genomic integration activity requires specific DNA sequences containing inverted terminal repeats with similarity to piggyBac transposons, as well as distinct aspartic acid residues in its transposase domain. However, the ancestral transposon substrates of PGBD5 cannot be predicted due to its very ancient evolutionary origin. The protein's presence suggests that genomic remodeling contributes to its biological function. Transposons are mobile genetic elements found in nearly all organisms, including humans. They contribute to the developmental and adaptive regulation of gene expression and are a significant source of genetic variation that drives genome evolution. The piggyBac transposase has a preference for integration at TTAA target sites in the host genome. In humans, at least one hundred L1 long interspersed repeated sequences actively transpose in human genomes and induce structural variation, including somatic rearrangements in neurons that may contribute to neuronal plasticity.
Researchers have identified 195 peptide ligands from Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular parasite viewed as a serious health risk for people with suppressed immune systems, such as HIV/AIDS patients, cancer patients and pregnant women. The parasite's cell-survival strategy depends on sticking inside host cells, and its ability to present these ligands to the host immune system is key to its success. Up to now, few peptides had been identified in the T gondii infection process, however these peptides play an important role in activating T-cells, which target and kill infected cells. The finding  comes from the University of Utah, which collaborated with a number of other institutions on the research.

The bithorax complex (BX-C) in Drosophila melanogaster contains genes that determine body segment identity and are regulated by cis-regulatory domains, with repression of these domains depending on Polycomb Group (PcG) functions. In this study, chromatin from single parasegments was isolated and profiled to search for parasegment-specific signatures that reflect PcG function. The H3K27me3 profiles across the BX-C in successive parasegments showed a “stairstep” pattern that revealed sharp boundaries of the BX-C regulatory domains. These findings provide a molecular definition of the homeotic domains and implicate precisely positioned H3K27 modifications as a central determinant of segment identity.
Newly discovered lumbar vertebrae from Malapa Hominin 2 (MH2) shed light on the posture and locomotion of Australopithecus sediba, an early hominin from South Africa. The study shows that MH2 demonstrated adaptations to bipedalism, including lumbar lordosis and an increase in the width of intervertebral articular facets from the upper to lower lumbar column. The researchers also found that A. sediba likely used their lower back in both bipedal and arboreal positional behaviors. The discovery helps to comprehensively evaluate the evolution of adaptations to bipedalism in A. sediba and distinguish their features from extant great apes.
Researchers have discovered a novel resting-state network in the human brain based on delayed connectivity between the brain and the slow electrical rhythm generated in the stomach. The network is composed of regions with functional properties involved in mapping bodily and external space and overlaps with classical resting-state networks. The results demonstrate that conventional resting-state networks based on instantaneous connectivity represent only one possible partition of the brain into coherent networks based on temporal dynamics. The network is specific to individual gastric peak frequency and is highly unlikely to be a chance finding. The gastric network overlaps with body maps classically associated with different modalities, including touch in somatosensory cortices, action in medial wall motor regions, and vision in the extrastriate body area.
The study investigates the role of memory retrieval in memory enhancement through the process of memory reconsolidation, where new information is integrated into reactivated memories. The study used an inhibitory avoidance (IA) task in mice to investigate the mechanisms of fear memory enhancement through reconsolidation. The results showed that the mice had enhanced IA memory through reconsolidation under conditions in which memory extinction was not induced. This memory enhancement was mediated by neurons in the amygdala, hippocampus, and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) through the activation of calcineurin-induced proteasome-dependent protein degradation and cAMP responsive element binding protein-mediated gene expression. The study further revealed that the amygdala is required for memory reconsolidation and enhancement, whereas the hippocampus and mPFC are required for only memory enhancement. Furthermore, memory enhancement triggered by retrieval utilizes distinct mechanisms to strengthen IA memory by additional learning that depends only on the amygdala. Therefore, the study concludes that reconsolidation functions to strengthen the original memory and shows the dynamic nature of reactivated memory through protein degradation and gene expression in multiple brain regions.
The article discusses the role of programmed cell death (PCD) in shaping neural networks and animal behavior through evolution. The authors demonstrate that PCD occurs continuously throughout insect neurogenesis and plays a key role in generating change. The article focuses on the medial neuroblast lineage in Drosophila melanogaster and how blocking PCD in this lineage produces "undead" neurons with complex arborizations and distinct neurotransmitter identities that are functional when activated. The authors propose that changes in neural circuits may result from heritable alterations in the extent and pattern of PCD in hemilineages. The article also provides insight into the specific type of PCD involved in nervous system evolution and describes a novel genetically encoded effector caspase probe called SR4VH used to detect postembryonic neuronal death in larvae. Overall, the article highlights the importance of studying the mechanisms of neural development to understand how new circuits and behaviors evolve.
The Metagenomics Genome-Phenome Association (MetaGPA) study framework allows for the linking of genetic information in metagenomes with a dedicated functional phenotype, and has been used to identify enzymes associated with cytosine modifications in environmental samples. MetaGPA identifies protein domain families and their corresponding candidate genes that are truly related to the phenotypes of interest. The MetaGPA workflow uses a computational pipeline to define genetic units associated with the phenotype, and further analysis tools to refine these associations. One novel cytosine-modifying mechanism identified is the formation of a previously unknown cytosine modification, 5-carbamoyloxymethylcytosine, in DNA and RNA, catalyzed by a newly discovered nucleic acid-modifying enzyme, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine carbamoyltransferase. The method is a powerful and versatile tool for advancing functional metagenomics.
Ca2+ oscillations play an important role in regulating various cellular processes and are known to regulate calcineurin activity; however, the spatiotemporal relationship between Ca2+ oscillations and calcineurin signalling is not fully understood. The present study aimed to explore the subcellular regulation of calcineurin by Ca2+ oscillations in MIN6 β-cells. Using gene-encoded fluorescent biosensors, the study found that Ca2+ oscillations produce distinct temporal patterns of calcineurin activity in the cytoplasm and plasma membrane versus the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, which are determined by variations in the subcellular distribution of calmodulin. The activity of calmodulin is thought to play an important role in shaping both the temporal and spatial aspects of calcineurin signalling. Furthermore, the study found that the response of calcineurin activity to Ca2+ oscillations was different on the surface of the ER and mitochondria in comparison to the cytoplasm and plasma membrane, which appear to be integrating the oscillatory input. The study suggests that oscillatory signals can differentially regulate calcineurin activity, and calmodulin plays a more active role in transducing oscillatory Ca2+ signals.
This document discusses the automatic processes involved in detecting conflict in sensory input, even when not paying attention to the conflicting information. The authors conducted six different behavioral tasks and recorded electroencephalography data to analyze neural responses to conflict in various scenarios. They found that conflict detection only occurred when at least one feature of a conflicting stimulus was attended, suggesting an attentional bottleneck at the level of objects. The study also explores the role of object-based attention in conflict detection and the potential existence of a high-level attentional bottleneck in complex cognitive processes. Overall, the authors aim to investigate the role of attention in conflict resolution and cognitive control operations.
The study uses in vivo optical vibrometry to measure sound-evoked motility in the 13-25 kHz region of the gerbil cochlea. The study finds that outer hair cells (OHCs) operate more like envelope detectors in a classical gain-control scheme than high-frequency sound amplifiers. The study shows that the vibrations in the OHC/Deiters' cell region exhibit significant rectification, producing 2nd order distortions such as the 'quadratic difference tone' at f2-f1, and that the OHC vibrations were strongly rectified. The study confirms that OHCs are the source of the DP2s that are part of the electromotile response. The DP2 spectrum is utilized to study the RC problem. The study uses a stimulus that produces a rich DP2 spectrum upon rectification and identifies three causes of scatter in the DP2 spectrum. The study confirms the dominant factor in the entire frequency range tested is the RC time of the cell membrane, suggesting a fundamental reconsideration of the role of the OHCs in cochlear function and the causes of cochlear hearing loss.
A new study has identified a mechanism by which HIV-1 DNA restricts its replication within macrophages. It involves the incorporation of dUTP into HIV-1 DNA during reverse transcription, resulting in pre-integration restriction and post-integration mutagenesis. The presence of viral uracils in short-lived monocytes suggests their recent infection through contact with virus producing cells in a tissue reservoir. The study reveals new elements of a viral defense mechanism involving host uracil base excision repair that may be relevant to the establishment and persistence of HIV-1 infection. The findings could help develop new strategies for tackling HIV.
Plant defensin NaD1 has been found to bind to the plasma membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate (PIP2) with a “cationic grip” configuration, leading to cell lysis in fungal and mammalian tumor cells. Using X-ray crystallography, the researchers determined the structure of NaD1 in complex with PIP2, revealing an oligomeric arrangement comprising seven dimers of NaD1 that cooperatively bind 14 PIP2 molecules. Mutagenesis confirmed that PIP2-mediated oligomerization is important for fungal and tumor cell permeabilization. These findings provide new insight into the role of ligand binding and oligomer formation of defensins during membrane permeabilization.
Type XVII collagen (COL17) plays an important role in regulating the proliferation of the interfollicular epidermis (IFE), and its deficiency results in aging phenotypes of hair and junctional epidermolysis bullosa. The study indicates that COL17 is essential for regulating IFE proliferation in neonatal mice through activation of the Wnt pathway, and the hyperproliferation of IFE keratinocytes is induced by organismal ageing. In aged mice, COL17 overexpression suppresses IFE hypertrophy. The findings suggest that COL17 could be an important target for anti-aging strategies in the skin.
The intracellular signaling molecule Dishevelled (Dvl) mediates both canonical and non-canonical Wnt signaling pathways. The peptide-binding pocket of the Dvl PDZ domain can be occupied by Dvl's own highly conserved C-terminus, inducing a closed conformation. While Dvl cooperates with other Wnt pathway elements to activate canonical Wnt signaling, the open conformation of Dvl more effectively activates Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). The Dvl C-terminus binds intramolecularly to the Dvl PDZ domain, interfering with interactions between the Dvl PDZ domain and its other binding partners in the Wnt signaling pathways. The findings suggest that the conformational change of Dvl regulates Wnt stimulated JNK activity in the non-canonical Wnt signaling, controlling convergent extension (CE) and polarized cellular orientation.
Researchers have unveiled a high-throughput method of genetic exploration using yeast that will allow mapping of all genetic loci without disrupting essential functions. The technique, called SAturated Transposon Analysis in Yeast (SATAY), combines the advantages of previous yeast genome screening methods and improves their limitations. Unlike ordered deletion libraries, the transposon-based libraries can be grown in any condition to reveal condition-specific genetic requirements. SATAY offers a powerful model for systems genetics, allowing exploration of the genome at a finely tuned resolution and throughput, said the researchers.
Researchers have discovered how Bak dimers, proteins that help to regulate apoptotic cell death, form disordered clusters and generate lipidic pores in order to puncture the mitochondrial outer membrane, allowing the release of proteins that trigger cell death. Bak and its partner protein Bax are essential in apoptosis and only become activated in the presence of BH3-only proteins, before converting to an oligomeric form and moving to the mitochondrial membrane. Once there, the proteins collaborate to create structures that pierce the membrane. The researchers used cysteine labelling and linkage analysis to the full length of Bak in mitochondria, and their findings may help to identify new therapeutic targets for cancer and other diseases that relate to apoptosis.
The study found that mice with a gene mutation related to mental illness (Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 or Disc1) exhibit depression-related behavior and impaired synchrony in the prelimbic cortex. The impairment in synchrony is caused by local defects of parvalbumin (PV)-expressing fast-spiking interneurons (FS-INs), which receive fewer excitatory inputs and form fewer release sites on targets. This impairment in synchrony and PV-IN count is considered a network defect underlying depression in humans. The study also conducted a comprehensive analysis covering a wide spectrum of behavioral deficits characteristic of psychiatric syndromes. Overall, the study provides a correlative link between behavior alterations in Disc1 mice and the possible underlying cellular and synaptic mechanisms.
This article discusses the concept of synthetic datasets, which mimic real datasets but reduce disclosure risk as they do not represent real individuals. Synthetic datasets can overcome replicability issues and allow for data exploration while maintaining participant privacy. The article provides a practical guide and R script for biobehavioural researchers to create synthetic datasets and assess their utility. The benefits of sharing open research data are also discussed, including scientific, societal, and economic benefits. Examples of using synthetic datasets in biobehavioural research, such as investigating the impact of oxytocin administration and sociosexual orientation data, are provided.
The article discusses how self-organization of discrete fates in human development is mediated by a hierarchy of signaling pathways, specifically the WNT and ACTIVIN pathways. The study aims to investigate how cells maintain a memory of their signaling history by analyzing the activation of the SMAD signaling pathways in response to BMP4, WNT3A, and ACTIVIN. The results demonstrate that pre-exposure to WNT3A can stabilize the subsequent transcriptional response to ACTIVIN, implying the ability of human embryonic stem cells to record their signaling history without overt changes in fate. Two separate branches of the TGFβ pathway display distinct dynamics of signal transduction for both the R-SMAD and the co-SMAD, each with specific responses to BMP4 and ACTIVIN. The study suggests that the short SMAD2 signaling peak is sufficient to elicit a transcriptional response and fate changes in RUES2 cells exposed to ACTIVIN. Overall, the findings reveal the complexity of the signaling hierarchy in human development and the importance of understanding cellular memory in regulating cellular differentiation.
Cells can adapt to adverse conditions even when sensory information and genetically predetermined regulation are inadequate. Genes can achieve optimal expression levels through a stochastic search for improved fitness that focuses on improving the overall health of the cell. This stochastic tuning operates locally at individual gene promoters and its efficacy is modulated by perturbations to chromatin modification machinery. The ability of this stochastic tuning mechanism to find near-optimal gene-expression states for a system with thousands of genes is remarkable. Experimental evidence for stochastic tuning in the adaptation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to laboratory-engineered environments shows that even with growth highly dependent on a single gene's expression, stochastic tuning may contribute to fitness through mechanisms acting in cis and trans acting on the promoter driving the gene, as well as tuning of unrelated pathways that benefit survival and growth.
A study investigated the long-term effects of a single bout of neonatal inflammation on adult respiratory control in the form of respiratory motor plasticity induced by acute intermittent hypoxia. Lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation at postnatal day four induced lasting impairments in two distinct pathways to adult respiratory plasticity in male and female rats. Despite a lack of adult pro-inflammatory gene expression or alterations in glial morphology, one mechanistic pathway to plasticity was restored by acute, adult anti-inflammatory treatment, suggesting ongoing inflammatory signaling after neonatal inflammation. An alternative pathway to plasticity was not restored by anti-inflammatory treatment, but was evoked by exogenous adenosine receptor agonism, suggesting upstream impairment, likely astrocytic-dependent. Thus, the respiratory control network is vulnerable to early-life inflammation, limiting respiratory compensation to adult disease or injury.
Researchers have discovered that influenza A viruses (IAV) rely solely on chicken ANP32A protein to support its replication in chicken cells. ANP32 proteins are necessary for IAV to carry out transcription and replication. Chicken ANP32B protein is apparently not functional for IAV polymerase, whereas chicken ANP32A is. The research suggests that IAV resilience in poultry could be engineered by genetic deletion or amino acid changes of the LRR domain of ANP32A protein. The researchers edited chicken primordial germ cells with CRISPR/Cas9, creating chicken PGC cells with mammalian-like ANP32A which contained a biallelic deletion of eight nucleotides in exon 1, and PGCs lacking the 33 amino acid insertion in chANP32A. The study also suggests a strategy to develop antiviral strategies and aid the design of influenza virus resilient genome-edited chickens.
A study has found that carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecules (CEACAMs), which are found on nearly all vertebrate epithelial surfaces and are targeted by bacterial adhesins, exhibit repeated natural selection at protein surfaces targeted by bacteria, consistent with pathogen-driven evolution. Divergence of CEACAM proteins between closely related great apes can control molecular interactions with a range of bacterial adhesins, and gene conversion of CEACAM extracellular domains during primate divergence plays a key role in limiting bacterial adhesin host tropism. The study reveals how gene conversion shapes the first contact between microbes and animal hosts. Furthermore, the study found that CEACAM diversity within human populations has continued to be shaped by gene conversion with abundant human CEACAM1 variants mediating evasion of adhesins from pathogenic Neisseria.
The accurate prediction of protein structures is a challenging scientific problem as proteins with no detectable sequence similarity to currently known structures remain unsolved. However, researchers have made significant progress in this area by using residue-residue co-evolution information in the Rosetta structure prediction program to generate structure models for 58 of the 121 large protein families in prokaryotes for which three-dimensional structures were not available. These models provide structural information for over 400,000 proteins belonging to the 58 families and suggest hypotheses about mechanism and function. The co-evolution-based structure prediction method was applied to a benchmark of 13 transmembrane proteins with recently determined structures, which recovered the correct features accurately, such as kinked, discontinuous, and re-entrant helices. The Rosetta co-evolution-guided structure prediction protocol was also applied to the 121 large protein families with no known structure, and the models generated by this method were compared to those generated by traditional profile search and threading methods. The structural similarity of the Rosetta models to the top-ranked models generated by HHsearch/SPARK-X was very low, demonstrating the intractability of modeling these families using profile-profile/fold recognition methods.
This study aimed to understand the transmission dynamics of malaria parasites from humans to mosquitoes. A clinical model to induce gametocytes, which are a critical stage of parasite transmission, was explored. The study used the Controlled Human Malaria Infection model to induce gametocyte carriage and evaluate transmission-blocking interventions. The study found that all participants developed gametocytemia after exposure to infected mosquitoes. The best estimate of gametocyte half-life was 5.1 days for female gametocytes and 2.7 days for male gametocytes. The study also found that treatment with LD-PIP followed by a curative SP regimen resulted in the highest gametocyte densities and the largest number of gametocyte-positive days. The model can be used to evaluate the effect of drugs and vaccines on gametocyte dynamics, and lay the foundation for evaluating transmission-blocking interventions against falciparum malaria for downstream selection and clinical development.
The development of the different segments of the nephron in the kidney is important for water and solute balance, blood filtration, and metabolite excretion. The early nephron is patterned by a gradient in β-catenin activity along the nephron tubule axis, which affects nephron segment identities. The identifying molecular network for nephron patterning involves β-catenin signalling interacting with the BMP pathway and the PI3K and Notch signalling pathways. Multiple signalling pathways are integrated to control nephron segment identity specification. The β-catenin activity gradient is functional in the development of the proximal–distal axis of the nephron. Ectopic nephrons can be formed and are derived from Six2+ nephron progenitors.
Scientists have discovered a new technique for visualizing metal-labeled tissues, such as those stained with silver or gold nanoparticles, using spectral confocal microscopy. This technique involves inducing a surface plasmon resonance in the metal particles by exciting them with visible-wavelength laser lines and collecting the emitted signals at a shorter wavelength. The researchers demonstrated that this technique can be used to produce in-focus 3D reconstructions of metal-impregnated cells, providing a way to capture the cytoarchitecture of labeled neurons in their entirety. This technique has certain advantages over traditional fluorescence microscopy, which can be limited by photobleaching and out-of-focus light capture. The researchers believe that this new protocol has enormous potential for neuroscientists and cell biologists, particularly for the imaging of archived histological specimens containing silver- or gold-labeled tissues.
A new study from the University of Texas at Dallas has improved understanding on the rapid recycling of neurotransmitters that traverse synapses between brain cells. Neurotransmitters are molecules that are released from one brain cell, diffusing across a gap called a synapse, to influence, excite or inhibit another cell. This release is generally caused by an action potential firing in the releasing cell, followed by storage of the neurotransmitter in vesicles in preparation for the next release. However, recent studies have shown that some vesicles release their neurotransmitter without such a voltage-induced trigger, relying instead on unknown mechanisms that control the release of this transmitter from a reserve pool of vesicles. The study found that spontaneous vesicle fusion, occurring some 50% of the time, was recovered extremely rapidly with faster re-acidification kinetics than the triggered type of release. Furthermore, spontaneous vesicle fusion propensity is regulated autonomously, independent of the probability of evoked fusion at the same site.

The brain creates a framework for abstract associations about environment-behavior relationships, which enables humans and animals to adaptively apply pre-existing knowledge to new experiences. This process appears to take place in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), which is involved in long-term memory. The mPFC forms a knowledge structure over time that can be adaptively applied to new experiences. The development of mPFC population codes for common task features involves bi-directional changes in selectivity for relational versus physical stimulus features over weeks after learning.
The regulation of vascular tone is critical to support normal neural function, and CO2/H+ concentration plays a vital role in it. Normally, a rise in CO2/H+ concentration causes vasodilation, increasing blood flow to hasten the removal of excess CO2/H+. However, this response can interfere with the drive to breathe, as tissue CO2/H+ also controls respiratory output. Chemoreceptor regions, such as the retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN), have evolved a means of preventing vascular CO2/H+ reactivity through purinergic signaling that helps maintain arteriole tone during high CO2/H+ and enables respiratory chemoreceptors to function. Disrupting this mechanism decreased the CO2 ventilatory response. Purinergic receptors contribute to purinergic-dependent vasoconstriction in the RTN during high CO2/H+, involving activation of Gq-coupled P2Y2/4 receptors.
The centrosome is a microtubule organizing center (MTOC) that orchestrates microtubules into the mitotic spindle through its pericentriolar material (PCM). The activity of the centrosome is biphasic, cycling through assembly and disassembly during the cell cycle. Little is known about how the centrosome is inactivated as an MTOC, but analysis of endogenous PCM proteins in C. elegans revealed that phosphatases oppose the addition of PCM by mitotic kinases, ultimately catalyzing the dissolution of inner sphere PCM proteins at the end of mitosis. The remaining aging PCM outer sphere is mechanically ruptured by cortical pulling forces, ultimately inactivating MTOC function at the centrosome. The inactivation of MTOC activity is critical in a number of cellular and developmental contexts.
Researchers have purified and determined the structure of a full-length helical nucleocapsid of Hantaan virus, a pathogenic strain in the Bunyavirales order of segmented negative-strand RNA viruses. The nucleocapsid protects the viral genome and serves as a template for viral polymerase during replication and transcription. The structure reveals key sites for designing antiviral drugs against hantavirus infections, and suggests a model of nucleoprotein-polymerase interaction that enables replication and transcription upon local disruption of the nucleocapsid. The structure is also important for studying NSVs, as it is a unique opportunity to unravel significant properties of NSV replication.
The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with the development of various lymphomas, including Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), which is characterized by chromosomal translocations involving MYC and an immunoglobulin gene. EBV drives lymphomagenesis by suppressing MYC-driven apoptosis and activating MYC to promote cell proliferation. EBNA2, a transcription factor encoded by EBV, activates MYC enhancers and reconfigures the MYC locus to increase upstream and decrease downstream enhancer-promoter interactions, while the EBV repressors EBNA3A and EBNA3C inactivate enhancer-promoter hubs at BCL2L11, a gene that promotes apoptosis. These mechanisms involve the hijacking and reorganisation of enhancer hubs through the recruitment of specific cellular co-factors. Thus, EBV manipulates the same pathways that are disrupted in nonviral lymphomas.
Researchers studied the outcome of a typhoid clinical trial in Nepal, where fluoroquinolone-resistant Salmonella Typhi was observed. They identified a specific H58 subclade responsible for treatment failures and found that compared to gatifloxacin, treatment failure with ceftriaxone was significantly less with S. Typhi-H58, particularly in the case of infected patients with fluoroquinolone-resistant organisms. They also discovered a new emergent S. Typhi-H58 subclade associated with fluoroquinolone treatment failure, and found no data regarding disease outcome with this organism.
This study investigates the evolution of gene dosage on the Z-chromosome of Schistosoma parasites through comparative genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics. The research focuses on the difference in gene expression in Z-linked genes between males and females, which is often not uniformly regulated in ZW systems. The study finds evidence of compensation in the Z-chromosomes of the studied parasites, which were previously believed to lack chromosome-wide compensation. Different evolutionary strata are identified, and the authors suggest a more complex scenario than previously proposed. The research indicates the importance of examining post-transcriptional regulation of gene dosage at the protein level to obtain a complete overview of gene dosage evolution. The study could provide new insights into the evolution of sex chromosomes and dosage compensation in other organisms.
The document discusses the impact of single-capillary occlusions on cortical microinfarcts, which are linked to conditions like dementia and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Using blood flow simulations in realistic microvascular networks from the mouse cortex, the study found that the severity of microstrokes is influenced by local vascular topology and baseline flow rate. The largest changes in perfusion were observed in capillaries with two inflows and two outflows. The study also identified topological differences between capillaries responsible for blood distribution and those responsible for supplying oxygen and nutrients to cortical tissue. The document concludes by discussing the importance of in-depth quantification of blood flow changes in response to single-capillary occlusion for future studies.
Insulin resistance (IR) contributes to the development of diabetes, dementia, viral infection, and cardiovascular disease. Drug repurposing (DR) is seen as a way to identify treatments for IR, but there are barriers such as uncertainty over how well in-vitro assays can reflect in vivo disease. Researchers have now developed a human tissue IR signature that combines lifestyle-mediated treatment responses with biomarkers of disease status. This has enabled them to identify a diverse set of over 130 positively acting compounds, highly enriched in true positives, that target 73 proteins regulating IR pathways. This assay provides insight into drug target specificity, which is supported by deep learning-based genome-wide predicted pharmacology. Some of the drugs identified are suitable for evaluation in patients, particularly those with acute or severe chronic IR. The study also demonstrates that multi-gene DR assays can produce quantitative pharmacological feedback when comparing related drugs, which is critical for optimizing drug properties.
The neuronal PAS domain proteins (NPAS1 and NPAS3) are linked to various psychiatric disorders and they must bind with aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) to form functional transcription complexes capable of gene regulation. The study examines the crystal structures of NPAS1-ARNT and NPAS3-ARNT-DNA complexes, revealing that the wider mammalian bHLH-PAS family is capable of multi-ligand-binding and could be an ideal target for small-molecule drugs. The NPAS genes are highly present in the nervous system and their deficiencies are associated with behavioural abnormalities including schizophrenia, autism, hyperactivity and seasonal depression disorders. NPAS1 has been shown to function as a transcriptional repressor on its target gene tyrosine hydroxylase, and mutations that destabilize the heterodimer also compromise transcriptional repression.
The molecular roles of HOX transcriptional activity in human prostate epithelial cells are unclear, hindering the development of new treatments for cancer prevention and therapy. MEIS proteins are transcription factors that bind and direct HOX protein activity and are putative tumor suppressors frequently silenced in aggressive forms of prostate cancer. The study shows that MEIS1 expression is sufficient to decrease proliferation and metastasis of prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo murine xenograft models through HOXB13-dependent regulation of proteoglycans. These results define and underscore the importance of MEIS1-HOXB13 transcriptional regulation in suppressing prostate cancer progression and provide a mechanistic framework for the investigation of HOXB13 mutants and oncogenic cofactors when MEIS1/2 are silenced.
Loss of Drosophila HNF4 (dHNF4) results in symptoms of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young 1 (MODY1), including glucose intolerance, hyperglycemia, and impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). dHNF4 is required in the fat body and insulin-producing cells to maintain glucose homeostasis, promoting mitochondrial function and the expression of a homolog of Glucokinase, the MODY2 gene. Metabolomic analysis of dHNF4 mutants revealed coordinated changes in metabolites that are indicative of diabetes. These studies suggest that dHNF4 triggers a developmental transition that establishes the metabolic state of the adult fly, promoting GSIS and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to support the energetic needs of the mature animal.
Scientists have discovered a key regulator in the antagonistic relationship between plant growth and immunity. The transcription factor BZR1 is required for the suppression of immune signaling by brassinosteroids (BR), which are steroid hormones that promote cell division and growth. BZR1 induces the expression of several WRKY transcription factors that negatively control early immune responses. The study found that BZR1-mediated inhibition of immunity is particularly relevant during fast plant growth, such as during etiolation. The study also found that the suppression of immunity is triggered independently of a competition between BRI1 and PRRs for BAK1, which is a positive regulator of BR-mediated growth. The study concludes that BZR1 acts as an important regulator mediating the trade-off between growth and immunity upon integration of environmental cues.
The nuclear pore complex is key to the transport of material between cytoplasm and nucleus in eukaryotic cells. The complex consists of intrinsically disordered polypeptides containing phenylalanine-glycine (FG) binding sites for nuclear transport receptors. These polypeptides make up the permeability barrier in the pore of the complex but little is known about their structure and dynamics. Researchers have used fluorescence polarization and super-resolution microscopy to investigate the rotational mobility of probes within the FG-network and have found that the pores are made up of multiple dynamic environments with different properties. The researchers suggest that this complexity highlights the difficulty in discerning the mechanism of nucleocytoplasmic transport and its implications.
Root hair and non-hair cell fates in Arabidopsis are determined by a MYB-bHLH-WD40 transcriptional complex and regulated by internal and environmental cues, including brassinosteroids (BRs). BRs play a role in regulating root hair specification, but the mechanisms are unknown. This study examined root hair phenotypes in brassinosteroid-related mutants and found that BR signaling inhibits root hair formation through GSK3-like kinases or upstream components. Enhanced brassinosteroid signaling causes GL2, a cell fate marker for non-hair cells, to be ectopically expressed in hair cells while suppressing its expression in non-hair cells. The study demonstrated that brassinosteroid-regulated root epidermal cell patterning is dependent on the WER-GL3/EGL3-TTG1 transcriptional complex. BIN2, one of the GSK3-like kinases, phosphorylates EGL3 and TTG1 to inhibit the activity of the complex. These findings shed light on the mechanism of brassinosteroid regulation of root hair patterning.
The signal recognition particle (SRP) is critical for the biogenesis of most integral membrane proteins. Here, the authors present structures of native mammalian SRP-ribosome complexes in the scanning and engaged states, and suggest how the polypeptide-binding M domain selectively engages hydrophobic signals. The scanning M domain is auto-inhibited by a C-terminal amphipathic helix occluding its hydrophobic binding groove, and upon engagement, the hydrophobic targeting signal displaces this amphipathic helix, which then acts as a protective lid over the signal. Many prokaryotes lack an Alu domain and instead contain a simplified SRP composed solely of an SRP54 homolog and a short ∼110 nucleotide RNA. Despite extensive biochemical and structural studies, several basic aspects of SRP biology remain unresolved. The data could help to understand the hydrophobic signals that are promptly found by SRP before their cytosolic exposure leads to off-pathway fates.
The article presents a study on how attentional modulation of neural activity enhances visual performance. A deep convolutional neural network is used to model the feature similarity gain model of attention, which suggests that a neuron's activity is multiplicatively scaled according to how much it prefers the properties of the attended stimulus. The study finds that attention applied at later layers of the network has a stronger impact on performance than attention applied at earlier layers, and that attention applied according to tuning does not always propagate through the network successfully. The study shows that attention has a large beneficial impact on performance, with attention applied at the final convolutional layer performing best. The article also discusses the debated components of the feature similarity gain model of attention.
Researchers have identified a new neurodevelopmental syndrome caused by a biallelic germline mutation in the CAMK2A gene, which is critical for synaptic plasticity involved in learning and memory. The syndrome causes global developmental delay, seizures, and intellectual disability. The mutation, p. His477Tyr, is located in the CAMK2A association domain, which is necessary for its function and localization. Biochemically, the mutant is defective in self-oligomerization and unable to assemble into the multimeric holoenzyme, resulting in synaptic defects in neurons. This finding suggests that dysfunctional CAMK2A paralogs may contribute to other neurological disorders.
A study using Bengalese finches suggests that matching teaching methods to individual genetic predispositions can improve learning outcomes. The authors found that optimizing instruction in this customized way can equalize learning differences across individuals that might otherwise be seen as genetically determined. Researchers used cross-fostering and computerized instruction with synthetic songs to demonstrate that matching the tutor song to individual predispositions can improve learning across genetic backgrounds. The study suggests that personalizing instruction based on individual differences in learning styles or genetic predispositions could improve learning outcomes.
The genome of budding yeast contains areas where meiotic recombination occurs more frequently than in others, and this pattern is linked to the enrichment of certain proteins, namely Hop1 and Red1, which are important for the formation of double strand breaks. The contribution of these proteins to crossover recombination is not well understood. The study uses a sequence-specific endonuclease, VDE, to initiate recombination and shows that chromosome structure influences the choice of proteins that resolve recombination intermediates to form crossovers. The paper also discusses the differences between mitotic and meiotic recombination and the formation of crossovers, with meiotic recombination initiated by programmed double strand breaks and most events forming crossovers. The study concludes that local enrichment for meiotic chromosome axis proteins promotes MutLγ-dependent crossovers, whereas recombination outside of this environment forms crossovers by MutLγ-independent mechanisms.
The mouse olfactory sensory system is composed of 10 million cells, each expressing one olfactory receptor (OR) gene out of a pool of over 1000, resulting in a highly individualized olfactory system. Mapping the neuronal diversity in this system remains a challenge, but a recent study used RNA sequencing to precisely discriminate between cellular subtypes and count them with accuracy. The study found that the OSN subtype distribution varies extensively between mouse strains, but is stereotyped in genetically identical mice. The genetic variation in cis-acting elements of OR genes was identified as the greatest component influencing OSN composition, while olfactory stimulation with particular odorants resulted in modulation of dozens of OSN subtypes. The study provides comprehensive information on the regulation and individualization of the mouse olfactory sensory system.
Researchers investigated the mechanisms behind receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) specificity in craniofacial development by performing RNA sequencing on mouse embryonic palatal mesenchyme cells in response to platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. Despite both growth factors sharing intracellular pathways, they mediate distinct outcomes, with FGF driving proliferation and PDGF promoting PI3K-dependent differentiation. The late gene expression profile induced by both growth factors is divergent, but the early response is qualitatively similar. The researchers find that the FGF response is MEK-dependent while the PDGF response is PI3K-dependent. They demonstrate that overlapping domains of PDGF-PI3K signaling and osteoblast differentiation in the palate and increased osteogenesis in FGF mutants indicate that this differentiation circuit is conserved in vivo. Overall, the study provides insight into the mechanisms encoding RTK specificity.
The study explores how men and women use alcohol to regulate emotions differently, with corresponding differences in neural responses. The research involved 42 long-term abstinent alcoholic and 46 nonalcoholic participants, and analyses revealed blunted brain responsivity in alcoholic compared to nonalcoholic groups as well as gender differences in those activation patterns. The study indicates that impaired affect regulation is a primary motive for drug use, including alcohol, and that there are gender-specific differences in the regulation of emotions. Emotional processing is associated with activity within well-characterized network-based brain circuitries including prefrontal cortex, insula, cingulate cortex, and medial temporal lobe structures, including the amygdala. The study hypothesizes that AUD-related abnormalities in emotional evaluation would differ by gender, and these processes would be reflected by gender differences in brain activity during emotional evaluation. Overall, the study expected that the same brain regions as in the well-characterized system involved in emotion processing would be involved in emotional processes; however, they would not be impacted in the same way for men and women.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a major component of tumors and plays an important role in cancer progression. This study used proteomics to investigate the composition of the ECM in human mammary carcinoma xenografts and found that primary tumors of differing metastatic potential have different ECM compositions. The study identified ECM signatures of poorly and highly metastatic mammary carcinomas, revealing up-regulation of signaling pathways including TGFβ and VEGF. The study also identified proteins characteristic of highly metastatic tumors that played roles in metastasis, and showed that high expression of these proteins correlated with poor outcomes for ER-/PR- breast cancer patients. The study suggests that the proteomic analysis of the tumor ECM can be used to identify proteins playing causal roles in tumor progression that could be developed as prognostic or diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets.
The ability for stem cells to self-renew and differentiate via asymmetric division is a central feature of most stem cells. However, the role of phosphatidylinositol (PI) lipids and their regulators in asymmetric division is not well established. This report reveals that Vibrator, the sole type I PI transfer protein, controls asymmetric division in Drosophila neural stem cells (NSCs) by physically anchoring myosin II regulatory light chain, Sqh, to the NSC cortex. Depletion of Vibrator disrupts NSC polarity by disrupting the synthesis of a plasma membrane pool of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI(4)P), which is essential for anchoring myosin to the NSC cortex. Understanding how neural stem cells divide asymmetrically is central for stem cell and cancer biology.
Insects have a navigational center called the central complex (CX) that is involved in sensory integration and coordinated motor activity. While knowledge about the CX has predominantly come from research in fruit flies, a new study provides a comprehensive map of all major columnar neurons and their projection patterns in the CX of a bee. The study found numerous components of the circuit that appear to be highly conserved between fruit flies and bees but also highlighted several key differences. The findings contribute to the notion that the CX contains an ancestral circuit that is highly preserved across insects but with additional layers or modifications adapted to specific species' ecologies and behaviors.
The fungus Ustilago maydis undergoes sexual reproduction through the recognition of mating pheromones, resulting in a G2 cell cycle arrest that is necessary for successful infection of corn plants. This cell cycle arrest is initiated upon pheromone recognition and sustained until the fungus enters the plant tissue. The initial cell cycle arrest is brought about by targeting the importin Kap123, inhibiting the nuclear transport of the mitotic inducer Cdc25. The increase in pheromone signaling promotes Cdc25 degradation, essential for the maintenance of the G2 cell cycle arrest leading to the formation of an infective filament. The cell cycle arrest is imposed to ensure successful infection of plants. The b-locus provides a transcriptional regulator called b-factor that maintains cell cycle arrest during the growth of the infective filament. Premating cell cycle synchronization at the G2 phase occurs in U. maydis, unlike other fungi that undergo arrest at the G1 phase. The pheromone response MAPK cascade is wired distinctly to cell cycle regulation, resulting in the inhibition of nuclear localization of Cdc25 and its subsequent degradation. These steps are required to maintain cell cycle arrest during infection, and a defect in virulence is observed when this is impaired.
Researchers have developed a method for detecting functional reverse transcription and pre-integration complexes, which are responsible for the early phases of HIV-1 replication. By labeling nascent DNA combined with detection of viral integrase, the researchers were able to detect productive replication complexes and determine the association of the complex with specific viral or cellular proteins at different post-entry stages. They found that the viral CA protein remains associated with cytoplasmic reverse transcription and pre-integration complexes (RTC/PIC) but is lost on nuclear PIC in a HeLa-derived cell line. In contrast, nuclear PIC were almost always CA-positive in primary human macrophages, indicating nuclear import of capsids or capsid-like structures. They also found that the CA-targeted inhibitor PF74 exhibits a bimodal mechanism, blocking RTC/PIC association with the host factor CPSF6 and nuclear entry at low, and abrogating reverse transcription at high concentrations.
Cleavage Under Targets and Release Using Nuclease (CUT&RUN) is a new chromatin profiling strategy that releases protein-DNA complexes in situ for paired-end DNA sequencing without crosslinking or solubilizing total chromatin. CUT&RUN is performed in cells and results in quantitative high-resolution chromatin mapping and analysis of the local chromatin environment. The method can be used to yield precise transcription factor profiles in yeast and human nuclei and has extremely low backgrounds that requires only approximately 1/10th the sequencing depth as Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP), making CUT&RUN especially cost-effective for transcription factor and chromatin profiling. When used in conjunction with native ChIP-seq and applied to human CTCF, CUT&RUN mapped directional long range contact sites at high resolution. It is a simpler method compared to ChIP-seq while retaining the advantages of in situ methods. Targeted digestion by CUT&RUN reduces the background relative to complete genomic fragmentation for ChIP. CUT&RUN is simple to perform and inherently robust, and allows low starting cell numbers for analysis with robotic automation possible through reactions performed on magnetic beads.
The study focuses on identifying the neural circuitry responsible for controlling antennal grooming movements in Drosophila melanogaster. The researchers use a combination of anatomical, optogenetic, behavioral, and physiological techniques to isolate a circuit that consists of mechanosensory chordotonal neurons, interneurons, and descending neurons. The neurons within each layer are capable of specifically eliciting antennal grooming movements. However, there are differences in the duration of grooming elicited by neurons in the different layers, indicating that the circuit is organized to control both the command and the duration of grooming. The study provides insight into how stereotyped movements are controlled and identifies sensory neurons as responsible for eliciting antennal grooming movements.
Researchers from the Institute of Molecular Biotechnology in Vienna have found that single cells lacking pseudo-tumour suppressor genes may develop into tumours. To illustrate this point, the team focused on cells lacking the PTEN gene, a negative regulator of PI3K cell signalling, using Drosophila (fruit fly) models. By removing PTEN from cells in developing tissues they were found to respond in a "hyperplastic way" when exposed to nutritional restrictions, with neighbouring cells being impacted as a result. The details of which can be found in a paper published in eLife.

Autolysins, enzymes capable of hydrolyzing peptidoglycan, play a major role in concealing inflammatory molecules from Drosophila peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs) and help bacteria become invisible to hosts' immune system. The activity of autolysins is not restricted to the producer cells, but they can also alter the surface of neighboring bacteria, thereby facilitating the survival of the entire population in the infected host. The amidase and glucosaminidase activities limit PGRPs to bind bacterial cell surfaces, and either amidase or glucosaminidase enzymatic activity is sufficient to impair recognition of bacteria by PGRPs. The role of amidase and glucosaminidase activities in concealing bacteria was confirmed using purified enzymes.
The article discusses how KCNE1 β-subunits alter the state-dependent interactions of voltage-sensing domains to the pore, impacting the gating and permeation properties of the KCNQ1 voltage-gated potassium channel. This modulation is critical for the physiological role of the IKs current in maintaining stable heart rhythms. The article identifies the intermediate and the fully activated states of the VSD that yield robust pore opening and shows that pore opening is not independent of gating. The authors propose that KCNE1 alters how the VSD and pore interact through VSD-pore interactions, hence modulating the KCNQ1 channel. Voltage-clamp fluorometry is used to monitor VSD activation and pore opening, revealing multiple components of the fluorescence signals for KCNQ1 and KCNQ1+KCNE1. The authors conclude that KCNE1 primarily modulates the KCNQ1 channel by altering VSD-pore interactions.
Researchers have discovered the mechanism that enables microtubules to move chromosomes within cells. Microtubules are protein polymers that can produce mechanical work without the aid of motor enzymes. They generate pushing and pulling forces and the depolymerisation of the tubulin subunits that make up the tubules can produce pulling forces that drive mitotic chromosome movements. The mechanism that enables the depolymerisation of the subunits to drive force is unknown. A new study has shown that protofilaments, the rows of tubulin subunits that make up microtubules, drive mechanical force compared to conventional motors through a spring-like mechanism called the conformational wave mechanism.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) regulates multiple signaling pathways in the brain and has been implicated in various psychiatric disorders. GSK-3 mediates the effects of phosphorylating key cytoskeletal proteins, but its role in developing cortical neurons is not clear. Using conditional mouse mutants, researchers found that GSK-3 activity is essential for radial neuron migration in all areas of the cortex and in the hippocampus, and GSK-3 regulation is mediated by phosphorylation of key cytoskeletal proteins. The migration defect in Gsk3-deleted mice affected the upper layer neurons’ positioning, and their basal dendrites exhibited abnormal orientation. However, GSK-3 regulation of migration in neurons was independent of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. The study suggests that GSK-3 signaling is a critical regulator of neuronal migration and morphogenesis.
Researchers have discovered that after cardiac ischaemia, pericytes in the heart cause constriction of coronary capillaries, reducing microvascular blood flow even after reperfusion of the culprit artery. This "no-reflow" phenomenon worsens patient prognosis and affects up to 50% of patients. The study reveals that pericytes are poorly understood in the heart and highlights them as a novel therapeutic target in ischaemic heart disease. The study also demonstrates that adenosine, a pericyte relaxant, decreases capillary blockages, reduces microvascular blood block, and increases perfusion volume. Cardiac pericytes, therefore, present a potential target for treating no-reflow, which predicts a worse outcome after myocardial ischaemia as unpredictable after decades of research.
D2 receptors are important for regulating dopamine release in the brain, and their two isoforms, D2S and D2L, have different roles as autoreceptors that have not been well elucidated. In a study using viral expression of the isoforms in mice, it was found that D2S, but not D2L, had calcium-dependent desensitization similar to endogenous autoreceptors. Two different pathways of calcium signaling were identified that regulated D2 autoreceptor-dependent GIRK signaling, which differently affected desensitization and the magnitude of D2S and D2L receptor-dependent GIRK currents. Further, in vivo cocaine exposure removed calcium-dependent D2 autoreceptor desensitization in wild type but not D2S-only mice. These results suggest a functional role for co-expression of D2S and D2L autoreceptors.
A study has found that LRP4, a conserved transmembrane protein known for its postsynaptic roles, functions as an organizing molecule presynaptically in the Drosophila brain.Its loss reduces excitatory synapse number and impairs active zone architecture, and LRP4 overexpression increases synapse number in excitatory and inhibitory neurons. LRP4 ensures normal synapse number and behavior via the conserved kinase SRPK79D, and this highlights its presynaptic function, enabling deeper understanding of how synaptic organisation is coordinated. Loss of synaptic organization can result in neurodevelopmental disorders and intellectual disabilities.

The role of error signals transmitted by cerebellar climbing fiber activity in motor learning has been widely debated. Recent research has shown that the cerebellum plays an active role in determining whether it will adapt to the error signals it receives from climbing fibers. Additionally, evidence has shown that performance errors activate neurons in the inferior olive and their climbing fiber axons, which trigger the induction of plasticity in the cerebellar cortex to produce adaptive changes in behavior. However, conflicting evidence has left unresolved the question of whether error signals in the climbing fibers are the driver of motor learning. Recent studies suggest that a Purkinje cell's response to its climbing fiber input can be graded and can regulate the efficacy of climbing fiber stimulation to induce plasticity. The VOR-inducing cerebellar motor learning paradigm, which activates the cerebellar cortical microcircuit via the vestibulo-ocular reflex, has been compared during the learned increases and decreases of the VOR gain, and the ability of climbing fibers to induce plasticity can be dynamically gated in vivo under conditions where climbing fibers are robustly activated by performance errors. 
Researchers have identified a new activity in nuclear extracts of uninfected cells that facilitates second-phase replication of influenza virus RNA, according to a report on the eLife website. The new factor, IREF-2, consists of host proteins pp32 and APRIL and allows robust unprimed vRNA synthesis from a cRNA template. Knock down experiments indicated that IREF-2 is involved in in vivo viral replication.
The study focuses on the protein complexin and its interactions with SNAREs, which control the release of neurotransmitters. Single molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments were conducted to observe how complexin-1 regulates spontaneous and activates Ca2+-triggered neurotransmitter release. Two conformations of complexin-1 were observed when bound to the ternary SNARE complex – one called cis and the other trans. The accessory domain of complexin-1 played a crucial role in regulating spontaneous fusion. Proper assembly of the ternary SNARE complex was ensured using the dN-SB method.
A new study has identified microtubule-depolymerizing kinesin Kif2C as a protein associated with DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and known DSB repair proteins in mammalian cells. Kif2C knockdown or knockout led to accumulation of endogenous DNA damage, DNA damage hypersensitivity, and reduced DSB repair via both NHEJ and HR. The study suggests that the physical mobility of DSBs mediates the sub-nuclear organization and positioning of DSBs to facilitate DNA repair, and Kif2C facilitates DSB mobility and modulates the formation, fusion, and resolution of DNA damage foci. The study established Kif2C as a new player of the DNA damage response and presented a new mechanism that governs DSB dynamics and repair.
The visual message conveyed by retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) to the brain is not fully understood. Linear reconstruction of natural images from the responses of four macaque RGC types was performed to explore this possibility. The results showed that the optimal reconstruction filter for each RGC reflected natural image statistics and resembled the receptive field only when nearby, same-type cells were included. Correlated activity and nonlinearities had only minor effects on reconstruction. Spatiotemporal reconstructions exhibited similar spatial properties, suggesting that the results are relevant for natural vision. The spatial structure of the visual message of a single parasol cell is primarily influenced by neighboring cells of the same type and is largely unaffected by cells of other types. Similarly, the filters for the midget cells were also shaped by the inclusion of remaining cells of the same type and were largely unaffected by the inclusion of opposite polarity cells of either type.
Researchers have found that motion anticipation, where the visual system compensates for the slow speed of phototransduction so that a moving object can be accurately located, is computed autonomously within the dendritic tree of each ganglion cell and relies on feedforward inhibition, according to a study from University College London. Rather than general features of the retinal connectome, the excess of inhibitory inputs rather than specific features, is what allows tracking of all directions of motion, while the average distance between inputs determines the object velocities that can be compensated for.
Antimicrobial resistant determinants (ARDs) can be transmitted to humans through the consumption of meat products or exposure to environmental effluents. This study tracked the presence and abundance of ARDs in commercial cattle as they moved through the beef production process, from feedlot entry to slaughter. The study found over 300 unique ARDs and found that resistome diversity decreased while cattle were in the feedlot, indicating selective pressure. However, no ARDs were identified in beef products, suggesting that slaughter interventions may reduce the risk of transmission of ARDs to beef consumers. The study highlights the need for a better understanding of the risks posed by the transmission of non-pathogenic bacteria that carry ARDs and the utility of metagenomics for assessing public health risks regarding antimicrobial resistance. The study also raises concerns about the potential risk posed by indirect environmental exposures to the feedlot resistome.
Researchers have used novel culturing and computational methods, alongside analytical techniques, to map the proteome and transcriptome during the replicative lifespan of yeast. They found that with age, proteins involved in protein biogenesis increase relative to their transcript levels, leading to metabolic shifts and the loss of stoichiometry in protein complexes. The researchers suggest that uncoupling protein levels from their corresponding messenger RNA is responsible for the changes occurring in aging yeast, and that targeting protein synthesis or repairing the downstream consequences can serve as interventions in aging. This study provides a systems-level model of aging, unifying diverse observations made within the field.
Research indicates that bonobo groups may have culturally transmitted hunting techniques, as two groups with overlapping ranges showed a preference for different prey animals despite similar ecological factors. Hunting techniques were observed to differ between groups and appeared to have been learned socially. This research also highlights the importance of studying non-human animals to better understand the role of culture in shaping our evolutionary past.
The document discusses the transport of the proteins Bruchpilot (BRP) and RIM-binding protein (RBP) in synaptic vesicles (SVs) in Drosophila synapses. The study found that both proteins were co-transported in axonal aggregates in transport mutants and that RBP bound Aplip1/JIP1, a transport adaptor involved in kinesin-dependent SV transport. The study showed that the RBP C-terminal SH3 domains bind a proline-rich PxxP motif of Aplip1/JIP1, protecting the axons from forming ectopic azonal synapses. Direct interactions between AZ proteins and transport adaptors provide complex avidity and shield synaptic interaction surfaces of pre-assembled scaffold protein transport complexes. The authors suggest that regulating the association of AZ scaffold components during transport might offer insights into neurodegenerative scenarios. The document also describes a screen for RBP interaction partners and the identification of the Aplip1 adaptor protein that couples BRP and RBP to axonal motors such as kinesin.
Inflammation affects the risk and severity of brain diseases, including autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, and cognitive disabilities. The cytokine IL-1β plays a critical role in this process. IL-1R8 is a protein involved in immunity that inhibits the IL-1R signaling pathway. IL-1R8 deficiency is associated with inflammatory changes in the brain and cognitive defects. The activity of IL-1R directly affects the expression of MeCP2, a key player in brain development, leading to synaptic defects, dendritic spine morphology disruption, and plasticity-related gene expression. By linking MeCP2 to immune activation and demonstrating that synaptic defects can be reversed by pharmacological inhibition of IL-1R activity, this opens up the possibility for new treatments of neurological diseases through the modulation of the immune system.
A study aimed to analyze the time trends and levels of mean total cholesterol and lipid fractions, and the prevalence of dyslipidemia in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). The study included 197 population-based studies from 1964 to 2016. The results showed no strong trends in mean levels and prevalence estimates for lipid biomarkers, but low HDL-cholesterol was the most common dyslipidemia trait in LAC. The study suggests that LAC needs more comprehensive and quantitative evaluation of policies to decrease the burden of cardio-metabolic risk factors, and to improve awareness, treatment, and control rates for dyslipidemia. The study also recommends strengthening clinical guidelines to improve HDL-cholesterol with primary prevention strategies.
The MEND pathway, which involves membrane protein palmitoylation, occurs during the reoxygenation of anoxic cardiac muscle in a Ca-activated endocytosis. The function and abundance of cardiac Na/K pumps and Na/Ca exchangers is affected by the expression of the plasmalemma-directed acyl transferase DHHC5. DHHC5-deficient myocytes have an increased Na/K pump activity, increased surface area/volume ratios, and a decreased MEND response. The MEND pathway appears to be deleterious in severe oxidative stress, but may contribute to cardiac sarcolemma turnover in dependence on metabolic stress. DHHC5 activity significantly impacts cardiac contractile recovery after anoxia. Additionally, a PEGylation assay was used to determine the fractions of NCX1 and the regulatory Na/K pump subunit, PLM, resident in the cell's surface. Both of these proteins have extracellular N-termini and were amine PEGylated using a 5 kD NHS-PEGylation reagent. The surface fractions of both membrane proteins were significantly increased in DHHC5-GT hearts vs WT hearts.
A study investigated whether the hippocampus, a brain structure linked with both sleep and memory, is necessary for dreaming. Four human patients with selective bilateral hippocampal damage and amnesia were compared to a control group to assess the frequency, features, and content of their dreams using a provoked awakening protocol. The patients reported significantly fewer and less episodic-like and content-rich dreams compared to the control group, suggesting that hippocampal integrity is necessary for typical dreaming to occur. Possible explanations for this phenomenon include lack of material to process due to difficulty retaining information over longer time scales while awake or compromised core capacity for dreaming affecting memory processing.
Centromeres are specialized chromatin regions that play a critical role in chromosome segregation during cell division. Active transcription of centromeres has been observed, but the role of transcripts has been unclear. This study shows that centromeric α-satellite transcription is dependent on RNA Polymerase II and occurs during late mitosis into early G1, concurrent with new CENP-A assembly. Inhibition of RNA Polymerase II-dependent transcription prevents recruitment of CENP-A and its chaperone HJURP to human centromeres. Additionally, a 1.3 kb centromeric RNA physically interacts with CENP-A and HJURP in vivo and is required for the maintenance of centromere integrity. These findings indicate a direct physical role for centromeric long non-coding RNAs in the recruitment of CENP-A and HJURP, providing insight into histone variant assembly and centromere maintenance.
Soluble oligomers are known to drive neurodegenerative proteinopathies such as Alzheimer and Parkinson disease. Recent research suggests that specific interactors, in addition to oligomeric structure, contribute to regional vulnerability and drive pathogenesis. This study investigates whether polyglutamine-expanded ATAXIN-1 forms toxic oligomers in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, and if so, what underlies their toxicity. The team found that mutant ATXN1 does form oligomers and that oligomer levels correlate with disease progression in mice. Furthermore, oligomeric toxicity, stabilization, and seeding require interaction with Capicua, suggesting that stabilizing toxic oligomeric complexes could provide answers about pathogenesis in other proteinopathies. The study also discusses how the knockin mouse model can reproduce the progressive phenotype of SCA1, making it possible to investigate the relationship between oligomer levels and degree of motor impairment.
Researchers have discovered that histone-based control mechanisms work alongside DNA methylation to suppress transposable elements, or 'jumping genes', within early mammalian embryos. DNA methylation was originally thought to be the main controller of transposons in embryonic stem (ES) cells, but researchers found that an epigenetic switch towards histone-based control mechanisms was triggered as DNA methylation disappeared. These histone-based control mechanisms ensure the stability of long-term genome stability. Transposable elements make up about half of the mammalian genome yet, unlike the approximately 25,000 protein-coding genes, are not vital to sustain life, it is believed these remnants are evolutionary artefacts from an ancient past.

The study examines the effect of statistical regularity on the ability to detect new sound sources in an auditory scene. Using psychophysics and MEG recordings, the study found that scenes exhibiting regular statistical structure improved listeners' ability to detect new sound sources compared to randomly structured scenes. MEG recordings also revealed that regular scenes led to increased neural responses to both ongoing sounds and new sound sources. Additionally, the study found that the effect of regularity on detection was delayed when listeners were actively focused on the scenes rather than listening passively, and attention reduced the surprise effect. Overall, the study supports the idea that the brain is sensitive to statistical structure and uses it for efficient scene analysis.
Autotransporters are bacterial virulence factors consisting of two domains: an N-terminal passenger domain and a C-terminal β barrel domain that resides in the outer membrane. The mechanism by which the passenger domain is secreted is poorly understood. This article shows that a conserved outer membrane protein insertase (the Bam complex) and a molecular chaperone (SurA) are both necessary and sufficient to promote the complete assembly of the Escherichia coli O157:H7 autotransporter EspP in vitro. Furthermore, experiments using nanodiscs strongly suggest that autotransporter assembly is catalyzed by a single copy of the Bam complex. Finally, the article describes a method to purify a highly active form of the Bam complex that should facilitate the elucidation of its function.
A study has found that the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a suppresses squamous tumour growth in mice, while deregulation of Dnmt3b promotes it. Dnmt3a helps express epidermal differentiation genes and inhibits lipid metabolism genes by methylating their promoters, while Dnmt3b associates with gene bodies to reinforce their expression. Neither Dnmt3a nor Dnmt3b are necessary for skin homeostasis, but Dnmt3a suppresses tumor initiation, while both Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b prevent tumor progression. Combining the deletion of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b in mice causes squamous carcinomas to become more aggressive and increases their spread, making them more sensitive to the partial inhibition of PPAR-γ. However, loss of either Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b does not cause any significant epidermal phenotypical differences.
The article discusses meiotic drivers, genetic elements that break Mendel's law of segregation and gain an advantage in heterozygotes through outcrossing. Schizosaccharomyces pombe, a species that is thought to rarely outcross, has many meiotic drivers. The study measures mating phenotypes in S. pombe natural isolates and found that the propensity for cells from distinct clonal lineages to mate varies between natural isolates and can be affected by cell density and the available sexual partners. The study also found that the observed levels of preferential mating between cells from the same clonal lineage can slow, but not prevent, the spread of a meiotic driver in the absence of additional fitness costs linked to the driver. The article highlights that our measured values in the lab are not meant to indicate precise levels of outcrossing that would occur under unknown natural conditions. The article concludes that the success of drive systems is impacted by mating phenotypes and illustrates how meiotic drivers are successful in S. pombe through rapid gene evolution and occasional outcrossing.
Lymphatic vessel formation during embryonic kidney development has been characterized through 3D imaging using confocal microscopy at single-cell resolution. The study sheds light on the heterogeneity of lymphatic endothelial cell clusters in mouse and human embryonic kidneys and identifies complex kidney lymphatic abnormalities in a genetic mouse model of polycystic kidney disease. The study demonstrates a period of quiescence in the early stage of kidney lymphatic vessel development, followed by a progressive increase in lymphatic expansion after E15.5. The study also highlights the importance of the VEGF-C-rich niche in the renal hilum, where kidney lymphatics first arise.
The article discusses the ribosomal stress (RS)-p53 pathway, which is activated by disruptions in ribosomal biogenesis and leads to the activation of p53. The study focuses on a small molecule named Inauzhin (INZ), which has been shown to inhibit SIRT1, and activates p53 by inhibiting cellular IMPDH2 activity, leading to RS and activation of the RPL11/RPL5-MDM2 interaction. The study further identifies IMPDH2 as a potential target of INZ, and the depletion of NS by INZ disrupts ribosome biogenesis, causing RS and the release of ribosome-free RPL11 and RPL5 that bind to MDM2, inhibiting its activity towards p53. The article emphasizes the potential of INZ as a promising contender for a molecule-targeted anti-cancer therapy.
LARP4 is a posttranscriptional regulator of ribosomal protein production in mammalian cells, controlled by the 3' poly(A) tail and poly(A)-binding protein. It binds to mRNA coding region determinant of instability, which limits its expression. The mRNA levels vary >20 fold with synonymous substitutions that accommodate tRNA dynamics, indicating that LARP4 activity can be controlled by tRNA levels. LARP4 promotes longer PATs on heterologous mRNAs with associated stabilization, pointing to mechanisms by which it promotes mRNA stability and potential control of ribosomal protein mRNA by tRNA levels.
Non-transformed mouse fibroblasts increase oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) by nearly two-fold and mitochondrial coupling efficiency by ~30% during proliferation, supported by mitochondrial fusion. Impairing mitochondrial fusion by knocking down mitofusion-2 (Mfn2) decreased proliferation and OXPHOS. Intriguingly, blocking mitochondrial fusion slowed proliferation in both non-transformed and transformed cells. The Warburg effect, characterized by a high level of glucose consumption and fermentation to lactate, is typically associated with dividing cancer cells but is also found in normal proliferating cells such as non-transformed fibroblasts. Proliferating fibroblasts with Warburg metabolism not only have increased OXPHOS but also respire more efficiently. Glutamine is the primary energy source for mitochondrial respiration during proliferation. Our results indicate that proliferation of fibroblasts requires an increase in OXPHOS supported by mitochondrial fusion.
Researchers have developed a new method of data acquisition for cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) that enables near-atomic resolution single particle reconstructions. The method uses a phase plate to create phase contrast, allowing the in-focus acquisition of high-quality data that is difficult to obtain through conventional defocus approaches. The study highlights the advantages of phase plates, which improve image contrast and enable structural investigations of small, difficult-to-solve molecules or complexes. The researchers used a double-area focusing strategy which involved measuring defocus on opposite sides of the acquisition area to achieve the required nanometer-level focusing precision. This method enabled the team to obtain a 3.2 Å resolution reconstruction of the Thermoplasma acidophilum 20S proteasome.
A new study has found that natural killer (NK) cells in the human immune system can be activated by antibodies from malaria-infected individuals to control and inhibit the growth of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, in vitro. The study also revealed that NK cells primarily targeted infected red blood cells, while leaving healthy ones unharmed. The discovery could be used in developing more effective vaccines against malaria, which kills hundreds of thousands of people each year.
Researchers have developed a blood-DNA-methylation measure called DunedinPoAm that can determine the pace of biological aging among individuals born in the same year. The measure could be useful in trials of therapies designed to prevent disease by slowing biological aging, especially for young-to-midlife adult participants. The researchers validated DunedinPoAm in five ways, including testing its ability to predict future rates of biological aging in a randomized trial of caloric restriction. While promising, the development of additional measurements will be necessary to support the applied use of DunedinPoAm.
The mariner/Tc1 family of cut-and-paste DNA transposons are commonly used for genome engineering due to their specific insertion at TA target sites. A crystal structure of the transposase Mos1 in complex with transposon ends covalently joined to target DNA was obtained, which revealed distortion of target DNA and flipping of target adenines into extra-helical positions. Further experiments confirmed the dynamic base flipping in solution, and specific transposase residues were found to stabilize the target DNA and are required for efficient transposition. This understanding can be used to re-design mariner/Tc1 transposases with modified target specificities, which is important for targeted genome engineering applications. The molecular and structural origins for transposon target specificities are largely unknown, and this study provides a template for understanding how these transposons are integrated at TA target sites.
The nuclear membrane and nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are essential for the segregation of nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Mechanical disruption or NPC assembly perturbations trigger an ESCRT-dependent surveillance system that seals nuclear pores; however, how these pores are sensed and sealed is not well understood. Using a budding yeast model, researchers found that the ESCRT Chm7 and the integral inner nuclear membrane (INM) protein Heh1 are spatially segregated by nuclear transport, with Chm7 being actively exported by Xpo1/Crm1. The exposure of the INM triggers surveillance with Heh1 locally activating Chm7. The researchers found that perturbations to the nuclear envelope barrier would lead to local nuclear membrane remodeling to promote membrane sealing. These findings have implications for disease mechanisms linked to NPC assembly and nuclear envelope integrity. The study also explores the molecular determinants of Chm7 recruitment to the budding yeast nuclear envelope by Heh1.
Liver progenitor cells (LPCs) of biliary origin play a key role in liver regeneration under chronic or severe liver injury. This regeneration process, called ductular reaction (DR), is accompanied by dynamic remodeling of biliary tissue. The molecular mechanisms that regulate DR in different liver disease models are not well understood. In this study, Lutheran (Lu)/Basal cell adhesion molecule (BCAM) was identified as a crucial molecule to control the morphological heterogeneity of DR. Lu regulates the morphogenesis of DR depending on liver disease models. Lu-deficient mice showed severe defects in DR. Lu functionally regulates the remodeling of biliary tissue during liver regeneration, and provides new insights into the heterogeneity of LPCs among liver disease models.
Intestinal goblet cells play a crucial role in maintaining the protective epithelial barrier and immune response by secreting mucus and forming goblet cell associated antigen passages (GAPs) to sample lumenal substances. However, the cellular biology of GAPs and how goblet cells balance these processes remain unknown. Using high-resolution light and electron microscopy, researchers have identified that GAPs are formed by an endocytic event through acetylcholine (ACh)-dependent transcytosis. This allows for the delivery of fluid-phase cargo across the cell to the trans-golgi network and lamina propria antigen-presenting cells.  The study also found that ACh-induced GAP formation and mucin secretion are functionally independent and mediated by different receptors and pathways. These results suggest that GAP formation is a specialized fluid-phase endocytic pathway emerging from the basic exocytic machinery of goblet cells.
Self-organization of stabilized microtubules in Xenopus oocyte extracts leads to the formation of macroscopic networks that can spontaneously contract, driven by the clustering of microtubule minus ends by dynein. Based on this, an active fluid theory of network contractions was constructed, predicting a dependence of the timescale of contraction on initial network geometry, a development of density inhomogeneities during contraction, a constant final network density, and a strong influence of dynein inhibition on the rate of contraction. These results demonstrate that the motor-driven clustering of filament ends is a generic mechanism leading to contraction. The study sheds light on how cytoskeletal filaments and motor proteins organize into cellular scale structures and how molecular properties of cytoskeletal components affect the large-scale behaviors of these systems.
The dysfunction or death of pancreatic β cells underlies both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Urocortin 3 (Ucn3), a marker for mature β cells, is down-regulated in the early stages of type 2 diabetes in mice and when β cells are stressed in vitro. A small molecule inhibitor of TGFβ receptor I (Alk5) can protect cells from the loss of key β cell transcription factors and restore a mature β cell identity even after exposure to prolonged and severe diabetes. The commonly used drugs for type 2 diabetes do not reverse β cell de-differentiation or restore the functionally mature β cell mass after the de-differentiation has occurred. The loss of Ucn3 mRNA is an early event in β cell de-differentiation, suggesting that its expression could be used to test whether β cells at early or late stages of de-differentiation are able to regain a fully mature state. Insulin resistance-induced β cell de-differentiation is reversible, and even the severely de-differentiated β cells can return to a mature state after removal of the de-differentiation inducing stress.
Cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) is spread by aphid vectors through specialized transmission bodies (TB) within infected plant cells. The exact events during TB-mediated virus acquisition by aphids were previously unknown, but a study has shown that TBs react instantly to the presence of the vector by redistributing their key components onto microtubules throughout the cell. Enhancing or inhibiting this TB reaction pharmacologically or by using a mutant virus enhanced or inhibited transmission, respectively, confirming its requirement for efficient virus acquisition. The study suggests that CaMV can perceive aphid vectors either directly or indirectly through host perception. This novel concept in virology opens new research horizons, investigating the impact of 'perceptive behaviours' on other steps of the infection cycle. Transmission is viewed as a pivotal step in the infection cycle of viruses, a significant bottleneck for the infection cycle since only a small proportion of the countless viral genomes produced are passed on to a new host in a transmission event.
The study investigates how tool-specific and hand-specific neural representations are coded in the human brain by using functional MRI and multi-voxel pattern analysis. It is shown that tool use is supported by multiple distributed action-centred neural representations, which are shared with and distinct from those of the hand. Neural representations related to upcoming actions of the hand only are differentiated in areas of hand action and body perception, while coding related to upcoming actions of the tool is found in areas implicated in tool-related processing; tool-related processing and hand action processing are represented separately at earlier levels of sensorimotor processing before being integrated in frontoparietal cortex. The study also confirms that predictive signals for movement arise moments prior to execution, but that the specific role of the areas studied in tool use remains unexplored.
This study shows that a protein called AtFH2 in Arabidopsis thaliana localizes to plasmodesmata (PD), which are important channels for intercellular communication in plants. The protein functions in regulating the permeability of PD, likely by stabilizing the actin filaments that anchor to it. Loss of function of AtFH2 increases PD permeability and sensitivity to virus infection. Similarly, Class I formins in rice also target PD, suggesting conservation of this mechanism in plants. The study demonstrates the importance of formin in regulating PD permeability through actin filaments.
A tissue-based cyclic immunofluorescence (t-CyCIF) method has been developed to allow for highly multiplexed immuno-fluorescence imaging of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens mounted on glass slides, which are commonly used for histopathological diagnosis of cancer and other diseases. The t-CyCIF method generates up to 60-plex images using an iterative process in which conventional low-plex fluorescence images are repeatedly collected from the same sample and then assembled into a high-dimensional representation. It requires no specialized instruments or reagents and is compatible with super-resolution imaging. The method has been demonstrated to be effective for pre-clinical and clinical research and a natural complement to single-cell genomics.
RNA viruses, such as influenza, rapidly diversify into diverse quasispecies of related genotypes. Recent research has suggested that cooperation between these variants might increase population fitness. The report outlines a study that demonstrates strong cooperation between two distinct human H3N2 influenza variants that differ by a single mutation at residue 151 in neuraminidase (NA). The authors suggest that the cooperation arises because one variant is proficient at cell entry while the other is proficient at cell exit. The work represents an example of selection to generate and maintain two cooperating genotypes within a viral quasispecies. The research suggests that mixed populations grow better than pure populations in cell culture, implying that cooperation between variants improves viral growth.
A new study has revealed that stem cells located in the upper human airways are maintained by an equipotent basal progenitor cell population that functions through a process of population asymmetry in which their chance loss following commitment to differentiation is perfectly balanced by the duplication of others, leading to “neutral drift” of the clone population. The study also showed that this process is accelerated in the airways of smokers, leading to intensified clonal consolidation and providing a background for tumorigenesis. The research demonstrates a general methodological scheme that can serve as a template to study adult stem cell fate in other human tissues, with obvious implications for studies of clonal progression in neoplasia.
A study has shown that the tip epithelium of the branching mouse lung could be an effective way to study human lung development, as human and mouse tips are analogous. Using this discovery, the team behind the research was able to develop organoids that mimic aspects of human lung physiology and morphogenesis, and that can be used to study disease progression and developmental biology. However, the organoid system also identified mouse-human differences, including markers that define progenitor states and signalling requirements for long-term self-renewal.
The conserved Hairy/Enhancer of Split family repressor Hairy is a long-range repressor that mediates histone acetylation and methylation in large blocks with highly context-specific effects on target genes. Hairy exerts pervasive biochemical activity to change chromatin states at many loci unlinked to gene expression, revealing a possible pathway to evolution of novel gene regulatory connections. In this study, genetic tools were used to mediate induction of Hairy, and the genome-wide analysis of transcription, chromatin, and RNA polymerase II (Pol II) was conducted in the Drosophila embryo. The study identified 241 down-regulated and 146 up-regulated transcripts in response to induction of Hairy. RNA polymerase II (Pol II) binding was also regulated by Hairy in the blastoderm embryo. The study’s findings emphasize the importance of investigating the functional targets and chromatin effects of Hairy to provide important insights on the basic substance of evolutionary variation.
Researchers used electron tomographic analyses to study the relationship between spindle structure and function in anaphase B spindles in fission yeast. They found that the spindle organized a limited supply of structural components to increase its compressive strength, maintaining structural integrity throughout the elongation process. The study also confirmed that the spindles' contour length and microtubule number remained constant during anaphase B. The research provides insight into the mechanisms of eukaryotic chromosome segregation.
This scientific article explores the formation and spread of heterochromatin in eukaryotic chromosomes, a crucial process for regulation of gene expression and maintenance of genome stability. The authors focus specifically on the SIR complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is involved in heterochromatin formation. Through analysis of binding of Sir proteins to various chromatin templates, the authors propose that cooperative binding of modified nucleosomes mediates selective Sir recruitment and spreading. The article also discusses the basic unit of chromatin folding, the nucleosome, and the role of histone posttranslational modifications in regional and coordinated regulation of gene expression.
Researchers have developed a new cell source for liver transplantation therapy and drug discovery studies. They have successfully reprogrammed human infant hepatocytes into hepatic progenitor cells using small molecule inhibitors, which have a significant repopulative capacity following transplantation. These cells, called human chemically induced liver progenitors (hCLiPs), can redifferentiate into mature hepatocytes in response to hepatic maturation-inducing factors and exhibit cytochrome P450 enzymatic activities comparable to primary human hepatocytes. The ability to expand functional human hepatocytes is essential for liver regenerative medicine due to a shortage of donors and the limited proliferative lifespan of primary hepatocytes. This new cell source provides an alternative to expandable cell sources such as embryonic stem cell- and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatic cells and lineage-converted hepatic cells.
Researchers have developed a model capable of predicting future motor commands based on neuronal activity up to 30 seconds prior to an event in the Caenorhabditis elegans organism. The model predicts sequences of motor commands, dwell time statistics, and individual neuron activation using novel methodology that extracts loops spanned by neuronal activity in phase space. The model uses only two variables: the identity of the loop and the phase along it. Despite consistent inter-individual differences in neuronal activation, the model is able to operate universally across individuals. The researchers demonstrated the methodology by showing that the model can predict future motor commands on a cycle-by-cycle basis and is valid across multiple individual C. elegans.
Endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular disease (CVD) are associated with aging, obesity, hypertension, and physical inactivity. In the study, fluorescence-activated cell sorting, RNA sequencing, and bioinformatic methods were used to investigate the common effects of CVD risk factors in mouse cardiac endothelial cells (ECs). The results showed that aging, obesity, and pressure overload upregulated pathways related to TGF-β signaling and mesenchymal gene expression, inflammation, vascular permeability, oxidative stress, collagen synthesis, and cellular senescence, while exercise training attenuated most of the same pathways. A collagen chaperone Serpinh1 was identified as a potential therapeutic target in ECs. CVDs account for 10% of the global disease burden and constitute the number 1 cause of death in the western world. The heart contains a dense vascular network, and endothelial cells (ECs) are indeed the most abundant cell population in the adult mouse heart. Physical inactivity increases the incidence of several chronic diseases, whereas regular exercise training has positive effects on most of our tissues. ECs have a unique ability to influence the homeostasis and function of different tissues, and they are potentially a major cell type mediating the positive effects of exercise throughout the body.
The evolution of tetrapod dim-light vision is restricted by trade-offs between protein stability and activity, but natural environmental variation and widespread epistasis may allow indirect routes to adaptation. The evolution of E122 in tetrapod rhodopsin fixed 350 million years ago is associated with increased active-state stability but greatly diminished rod photosensitivity, leading to a paradoxical trajectory taken during the evolution of tetrapod dim-light vision. Fishes, on the other hand, may have explored alternative trajectories to adaptation via indirect routes with low MII stability. Strategies to engineer protein stability and activity require an understanding of a protein's sequence-function relationship, and natural sequence variation may reveal new blueprints for protein design. The evolution of tetrapod dim-light vision is constrained by trade-offs between the spectral and non-spectral functions of RH1 in natural systems. Tetrapod RH1 was constrained to this paradoxical compromise at site 122 for the last 350 million years, while fish rhodopsins show variation at site 122, such as in the Coelacanth and deep-sea fish lineages. The diversity and complexity of fish visual ecologies allowed selection the opportunity to explore the pleiotropic potential of site 122 through the evolution of novel structural interactions with nearby sites that could compensate for the destabilizing loss of the E122-H211 hydrogen bond.
The protein CPSF6 plays an important role in the early stages of HIV-1 replication, particularly in the nuclear entry of viral subviral complexes in macrophages. The study used quantitative microscopy to show that CPSF6 is strongly recruited to nuclear replication complexes in primary human macrophages, and that depletion of CPSF6 leads to accumulation of HIV-1 subviral complexes at the nuclear envelope and reduced infectivity. The study also shows that CPSF6 is associated with the nuclear basket at the nuclear pore complex in a CA-dependent manner. CPSF6 does not inhibit reverse transcription of HIV-1 during cytoplasmic trafficking, but rather facilitates nuclear entry at the level of the nuclear pore complex. The study suggests that CPSF6 has an important, CA-dependent function in early HIV-1 infection of macrophages, which may not be fully recapitulated in HeLa- or 293T-based reporter cell lines.
The article discusses the role of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) cherub in the development of brain tumors in Drosophila, and how its accumulation can lead to the formation of tumorigenic stem cells that sustain tumor growth indefinitely. The study found that cherub establishes a molecular link between RNA-binding proteins Staufen and Syncrip, and proposes that tumor cells proliferate indefinitely because cherub accumulation no longer allows them to complete their temporal neurogenesis program. The research also suggests that defects in asymmetric cell division can contribute to the acquisition of tumorigenic traits without the need of DNA alterations, making Drosophila a model for the stepwise acquisition of tumor stem cell properties. Transcriptome profiling of larval NBs identified cherub as crucial for tumorigenesis, but largely dispensable for NB development. The study concludes that malignant transformation is unlikely to be regulated through a stepwise acquisition of DNA mutations, but rather cell-autonomous events leading to highly proliferative tNBs seem to be of transcriptional or post-transcriptional nature.
Plants generate an enzyme called lysozyme 1 (LYS1) in response to bacterial infections, which releases fragments of bacterial cell walls called peptidoglycans (PGNs). These PGN fragments can trigger plant immune responses and the production of LYS1 is essential for immunity to bacterial infection. The study suggests that plants may use hydrolytic activities to decompose complex bacterial structures and generate soluble PRR ligands which aid PRR-mediated immune activation in the cells adjacent to infection sites. The research shows that plants make concerted use of PGN hydrolytic activities and of PRRs in order to cope with bacterial infections. However, knowledge of the mode of release of immunogenic fragments from microbial extracellular structures and their contribution to plant immunity is lacking.
The essential role of Cdc6 ATP hydrolysis in pre-replicative complex (pre-RC) assembly, where an MCM helicase double hexamer is loaded at DNA replication origins, is not fully understood. This study shows that although Cdc6 ATP hydrolysis is necessary to initiate DNA replication, it is not needed for MCM loading, as an ATPase-defective Cdc6 mutant (Cdc6-E224Q) promoted MCM loading on DNA. Cdc6 ATP hydrolysis is required to disengage Cdc6 from the pre-RC after helicase loading to allow subsequent steps in the MCM helicase activation in vivo. Cdc6-N263A was deficient in ATP hydrolysis in vitro and showed defects in growth viability. Cdc6-WT and Walker B motif mutants were purified from bacteria and had their ATPase activity assayed; Cdc6-E224Q and NQ mutants did not show any ATPase activity suggesting that ATP hydrolysis is required to disengage Cdc6 from the pre-RC. The study concludes that ATP hydrolysis is necessary for Cdc6 disengagement from the pre-RC to allow subsequent steps in the MCM helicase activation.
Researchers have developed a gene therapy to treat retinitis pigmentosa (RP), an inherited retinal disease that affects over 20 million people worldwide. The therapy involves an adeno-associated virus vector expressing Txnip, which prolongs the survival of cone photoreceptors and improves visual acuity in RP mouse models. Cone photoreceptors are responsible for initiating daylight, color, and high-acuity vision. RP primarily affects the rod photoreceptors, which initiate night vision, and then follows with the degeneration of cones. Currently, there is no effective treatment for RP, other than gene therapy for a limited number of specific disease genes. The researchers screened 20 genes for their ability to prolong cone photoreceptor survival in vivo and found that Txnip had a beneficial effect. The researchers suggest that the therapeutic effect of Txnip does not require an inhibitory interaction with thioredoxins. Furthermore, the therapy could potentially benefit cones not only in RP but also in other ocular diseases where similar environmental stresses are present, such as age-related macular degeneration.
Researchers have identified Lpcat3, an enzyme that results in increased lipid transport and lipoprotein production, suggesting that manipulating membrane composition could be used as a regulatory mechanism to control metabolic pathways. Lpcat3, which is controlled by the sterol-activated nuclear receptor LXR, is a critical determinant of TG secretion due to its unique ability to catalyze the incorporation of arachidonate into membranes. Mice lacking Lpcat3 in the liver show reduced plasma TGs, hepatosteatosis, and secrete lipid-poor very low-density lipoprotein, lacking arachidonoyl PLs. 
The Gram-positive bacteria Bacillus subtilis forms durable spores for survival during starvation. The process starts with an asymmetric cell division producing a large mother cell and a small forespore. The mother cell membrane then engulfs the forespore in a process similar to phagocytosis. However, the force driving the movement of the engulfing membrane remains unknown. This study shows that membrane migration is driven by cell wall remodeling at the leading edge of the engulfing membrane, mediated by the peptidoglycan synthesis and degradation process. They propose a model for engulfment in which the junction between the septum and the lateral cell wall moves around the forespore, creating a force for engulfment based on the coordination between cell wall synthesis and degradation. Antibiotics blocking peptidoglycan synthesis impair membrane migration and contribute to the localization of SpoIIDMP at the leading edge of the engulfing membrane.
This study looked at the role of the CaV2.1 calcium channel in the release of neurotransmitters in the central nervous system. The study found that the physical distance between the calcium channels and synaptic vesicles plays a crucial role in neurotransmitter release, and identified a region on the CaV2.1 channel that controls the speed and docking of vesicles independently of the channel's abundance. The study used the calyx of Held/Medial Nucleus of the Trapezoid Body synapse to manipulate the calcium channel and found no significant effect on the channel's localization at the presynaptic membrane when certain interaction sites were deleted. The study also identified a novel C-terminal region on the CaV2.1 channel that regulates fast synaptic vesicle release independent of abundance.
A study on toddlers with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) found atypical brain development during early stages, particularly in response to social stimuli. The study recorded gaze patterns and brain activity of toddlers with ASD and typically developing peers while they watched dynamic social scenes using high-density EEG and high resolution eye-tracking. Data-driven methods were used to investigate visual exploration behaviour and directed functional connectivity. The study found frequency-specific network atypicalities, with alterations in driving and connections from social brain nodes associated with autism. These alterations were found to be core components of atypical brain development at early ASD stages. The study has implications for improving therapeutic strategies for ASD.
Dynamin is a GTPase essential for membrane fission during clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and cooperatively regulates membrane remodeling with its binding protein amphiphysin. In this study, the researchers analyzed the structural changes of dynamin-amphiphysin complexes during membrane fission using electron microscopy and high-speed atomic force microscopy. They found that the dynamin-amphiphysin helices are rearranged to form clusters upon GTP hydrolysis and membrane constriction occurs at protein-uncoated regions flanking the clusters. Additionally, the researchers found a novel function of amphiphysin in size control of the clusters to enhance biogenesis of endocytic vesicles. This study provides new mechanistic insights into the dynamics of dynamin-amphiphysin complexes during membrane fission.
The article discusses the importance of DNA methylation for gene regulation and cell differentiation. The article explains that during mammalian development, there are two global DNA demethylation events followed by waves of de novo DNA methylation. DNMT3 proteins play a crucial role in this process. The article describes the use of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to investigate the chromatin features that influence the activity of murine DNMT3B. The authors found that DNMT3B preferentially methylates DNA in linker regions between nucleosomes and that DNMT3B and H3K4 methylation are mutually exclusive, while DNMT3B is co-localized with H3K36 methylated regions. The authors also show that the pattern of H3K4 and H3K36 methylation in embryonic male germ cells predicts which regions undergo de novo methylation, indicating that the mechanism observed in yeast is conserved in mammals. DNA methylation is important for processes such as imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, transposon inactivation, and gene expression regulation, and dysregulation of DNA methylation is a common feature in cancer and other human diseases.
This document discusses the importance of the coupling distance between neurotransmitter-laden vesicles and Ca2+ channels in chemical synaptic transmission. Using electron and super-resolution microscopy, the study maps the heterogeneous distribution of vesicle:Ca2+ channel coupling distances at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. The study finds that this distribution has strong constraints on short-term plasticity, and postulated facilitation mechanisms generate too little facilitation and too much variance. The study proposes novel facilitation mechanisms, including activity-dependent inhibition of vesicle un-priming or release site activation. The document also explains the activity profile of synapses upon repeated action potential activation and the presynaptic and postsynaptic short-term plasticity mechanisms that can explain the phenomena.
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans recognizes pathogenic bacteria and elicits defense responses by activating immune pathways and pathogen avoidance. The activation of DAF-7/TGF-β signaling in ASJ neurons is insufficient to fully explain the avoidance behavior, instead, intestinal infection and bloating of the lumen, which depend on the virulence of P. aeruginosa, regulates both pathogen avoidance and aversive learning by modulating not only the DAF-7/TGF-β pathway but also the G-protein coupled receptor NPR-1 pathway, which also controls aerotaxis behavior. The study shows that bloating of the intestine, but not the induction of DAF-7 in ASJ neurons, underlies the avoidance behavior. The results reveal how feedback from the intestine during infection can modulate the behavior, learning, and microbial perception of the host.
The article examines the assembly process of a bacterial microcompartment known as the carboxysome, which is responsible for facilitating carbon fixation in cyanobacteria. The simulations identify two classes of assembly pathways leading to encapsulation of the cargo, either concomitantly with cargo condensation or assembly around and budding from the condensed cargo complex. The simulations predict intermediates and closure mechanisms not accessible in experiments and show how assembly can be tuned between these two pathways by modulating protein interactions. The article aims to establish the principles controlling such co-assembly processes with the goal of engineering BMCs or viruses as nanoreactors that self-assemble around their reactants.
Sexual differentiation in mammals involves the activation of transcription factors SRY and SOX9 in XY gonads and R-spondin1 (RSPO1) mediated activation of WNT/β-catenin signalling in XX gonads. The absence of RSPO1/Rspo1 in XX mammals leads to testicular differentiation and female-to-male sex reversal, so it was previously thought that SOX9 was required for Sertoli cell differentiation during female-to-male sex reversal in the absence of RSPO1. However, new research shows that Sox8 alone can compensate for the loss of SOX9 for Sertoli cell differentiation during female-to-male sex reversal. Sox8 is also a candidate gene for promoting testicular differentiation in the absence of SRY and SOX9 in XX sex reversal gonads or in cases of Sox9-independent testicular differentiation in XY gonads. Sox8 and Sox9 are individually dispensable for testicular development in XY and XX mice lacking Rspo1, and loss of both Sox8 and Sox9 precludes Sertoli cell differentiation in XY and XX Rspo1 knockout triple Rspo1, Sox8, and Sox9 loss-of-function mutant mice. Sox8 may have a key role for testicular differentiation in XX sex reversal gonads or in cases of Sox9-independent testicular differentiation in XY gonads. Sox8 and Sox9 are expressed in the absence of each other in Rspo1 mutant gonads when testis cords are present or partial sex reversal occurs. Loss of both Rspo1 and Sox8 does not impair testis differentiation, but in XX Rspo1KO Sox8KO mice, seminiferous tubules devoid of germ cells were apparent at P10, suggesting a delay
This article discusses the contribution of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to adult hematopoiesis in steady-state conditions. The authors use an inducible lineage tracing model to assess the role of HSCs in hematopoiesis, revealing that HSCs are highly active contributors to multilineage hematopoiesis. However, the rate of HSC contribution declines with increasing age, likely due to reduced differentiation capacity. The authors also identify a gene, Fgd5, that marks HSCs specifically and use it to trace the progression of HSCs into various immature and mature hematopoietic cell types. Their findings suggest that HSCs contribute to different hematopoietic cell types with varying kinetics and that differences in lineage-specific maintenance mechanisms and lifespans might account for these varying contributions.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to identify the atomic structures of mitochondrial complexes III2, IV, and the III2+IV supercomplex in Vigna radiata (mung bean). Their findings challenge previously held assumptions about the complexes, revealing plant-specific differences in the MPP domain of CIII2 and disproving the belief that proton translocation in plants occurs via the H channel of CIV. The research provides the basis for developing more selective agricultural inhibitors of plant CIII2 and CIV.
The cost of quarantining individuals for possible exposure to SARS CoV-2 is high, and there is ongoing debate about the appropriate duration of quarantine. A mathematical model was developed to assess the impact of duration of quarantine on SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The model used empirically determined distributions of incubation period, infectivity, and generation time to quantify how the duration of quarantine affects onward transmission from traced contacts of confirmed SARS-CoV-2 cases and from returning travelers. The study found that there are quarantine strategies based on a test-and-release protocol that perform almost as well as a 10-day quarantine but with fewer person-days spent in quarantine. The findings apply to both travelers and contacts but the specifics depend on the context. Overall, the appropriate length of quarantine depends on both incubation period and the temporal profile of infectiousness. Making policy decisions about the duration of quarantine fundamentally requires specifying how the effectiveness of quarantine relates to its costs.
Astrocytes, a type of glial cell, show a structural sensitivity to functional boundaries in the cerebral cortex across species, according to a study in mice, rats and humans. While the distribution of blood capillaries ignores these boundaries, astrocytes, which control blood-flow, show significant anatomical segregation along functional borders across different mammalian species. This discovery could open up a new anatomical marker for identifying functional boundaries across species. The study could also provide insight into the regulation of blood supply to the brain in connection with neuronal activity, since the cerebral cortex has a remarkable capacity to regulate its own blood supply according to local neuronal activity demands.
The process of cell intercalation, which shapes tissue morphologies by inserting cells between neighboring cells, is essential for development. However, the function of tricellular vertices, the overlapping regions between three cells, has not been well understood. In this study, it was discovered that tricellular vertices move independently of each other during cell intercalation through a sliding mechanism that is physically coupled to radially oriented forces. E-cadherin and Myosin II were found to be important in this process, with their enrichment at vertices coinciding with length stabilization after sliding. The study also showed that apical area oscillations, which occur during many cell shaping processes, were linked to cyclic molecular dynamics through the radial coupling of vertex motion. Additionally, the study found that during area contraction, vertex-associated E-cadherin intensity systematically increased, and this peak occurred just before the onset of area expansion.
Researchers have discovered that a pattern of growth of sensory neurons in fruit flies is essential for recognizing the correct synaptic partner neurons as the brain develops. The team examined the Drosophila visual system, which is a highly stereotypical arrangement that provides an opportunity to understand the development of neural circuitry. By studying the R1-R8 photoreceptor or retinula cells in ommatidia (about 800 units of eight cells), the team identified that photoreceptor differentiation begins in a defined sequential fashion, led by R8, followed by R1-R6, then R7. This temporal characteristic has been shown to influence connectivity during further development. The study provides insight into the functional mechanism behind growth cone positioning in R cell axons and how this helps to identify synaptic partner neurons during visual map formation in fruit flies.
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) allows microbes to gain new capabilities and adapt to new environments. Identifying HGT regions within microbiomes can reveal molecular mechanisms that play key roles in microbiome assembly. Using cheese rind as a model microbiome, researchers identified over 200 putative horizontally transferred genomic regions containing 4733 protein coding genes, suggesting that HGT is prevalent in cheese rind microbiomes. They also found that the largest of these regions are enriched for genes involved in siderophore acquisition and are widely distributed in cheese rinds in both Europe and the US. This research provides foundational knowledge on HGT in an experimentally tractable system in which future work could help to provide insight into the role of HGT within microbiomes.
The actin cytoskeleton in fission yeast is a simplified system ideal for investigating mechanisms of cellular self-organization. Researchers have focused on the stabilising protein tropomyosin Cdc8, bundling protein fimbrin Fim1, and severing protein coffin Adf1 and studied their interactions with actin filaments to regulate their activity and segregation to functionally diverse F-actin networks. They observed and characterised two distinct Cdc8 cables that cooperatively load and spread on individual actin filaments. The findings reveal that competitive and cooperative interactions between actin binding proteins help to define their associations with different F-actin networks. The actin cytoskeleton is an ideal system to study complex cellular self-organization, with multiple functionally diverse F-actin networks assembling at the correct time and place within a single crowded cytoplasm.
The study examined the functional involvement of thalamocortical and corticothalamic pathways connecting the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) and the mediodorsal thalamus (MD) in rats during an instrumental learning task. The study showed that thalamocortical and corticothalamic pathways differentially support goal attributes, with both pathways participating in adaptation to the current goal value, but only thalamocortical neurons required to integrate current causal relationships. Inhibiting dmPFC-projecting MD neurons produced selective impairments when rats were forced to rely on representations to guide behavior. The impairment appeared to be mild when rats were required to use current goal value, but more pronounced when the contingency between an action and its consequence was altered. Overall, these data indicate a central role for thalamocortical pathways in the ability to guide choice based on current knowledge of the causal link between actions and their outcomes.
Researchers have developed a new algorithm to track the movements of C. elegans, a tiny worm commonly studied by scientists. The algorithm captures the worms' movements with greater accuracy than previous methods, and is able to track their unusual postures which are important to understanding their behaviour. The researchers discovered that certain types of worm movement were caused by deep reorientations which did not follow the traditional omega-shaped posture, and that the worm's movement patterns and postures could be analysed as low-dimensional activity patterns. The research could eventually lead to a better understanding of more complex animal behaviour patterns.
Researchers have discovered that Tachykinin (DTK) plays a role in regulating nociceptive hypersensitivity in Drosophila (fruit fly) larvae. Tachykinin is a neuropeptide that is structurally related to Substance P, a neuropeptide in mammals that regulates nociception. The study found that both Tachykinin and Tachykinin-like receptor (DTKR99D) are required for damage-induced thermal nociceptive sensitization in Drosophila larvae. DTKR99D is required in nociceptive sensory neurons for temperature-dependent increases in firing frequency upon tissue damage. The researchers also found that Hedgehog, another key regulator of nociceptive sensitization, was produced by nociceptive sensory neurons following tissue damage and that DTKR function was upstream of Hedgehog-dependent sensitization. The study demonstrates the conservation of Tachykinin signaling in regulating nociception and uncovers a novel genetic interaction between Tachykinin and Hedgehog pathways.
The AKT-GSK3beta-eIF2Bepsilon signaling module is important in regulating axon regeneration in the adult mammalian central nervous system, according to research on retinal ganglion cells. After optic nerve injury, AKT activation, following Pten deletion, has been found to promote axon regeneration and RGC survival. GSK3beta plays a key role in mediating AKT-induced axon regeneration, while eIF2Bepsilon is a novel downstream effector of GSK3beta in regulating axon regeneration. Therefore, AKT phosphorylates and inactivates GSK3beta, leading to improved axon regeneration but not RGC survival.
The macaque orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is essential for selecting goals based on updated values of expected reward outcomes. In this study, the contributions of OFC's anterior (Area 11) and posterior (Area 13) parts were examined by reversibly inactivating each area. The study found that neurons in area 13 must be active during the selective satiation procedure to enable the updating of outcome valuations. After this updating has occurred, however, area 13 is not needed to select goals based on this knowledge. In contrast, neurons in area 11 do not need to be active during the value-updating process. Instead, inactivation of area 11 during choices causes an impairment. These findings demonstrate selective and complementary specializations within the OFC, which could be fundamental to many addictive behaviors, compulsive disorders, and psychopathologies.
Researchers have developed a magnetic resonance and optical toolkit that allows for the mapping and quantification of neoangiogenesis in glioma models, which is important in developing antiangiogenic therapies to "starve" tumors off their resources. The technique allows for a better understanding of the biological actions of these therapies and the development of clinical trials. The toolkit uses in vivo magnetic resonance imaging and ultramicroscopy of ex vivo cleared whole brains to track neovascularization. The technique can also be used as a platform for high-resolution quantification of tumor angiogenesis. The mouse glioma cell line GL261 was used for the study, as well as the human S24 cell line. Animal experiments were approved by a regional animal welfare committee. The study involved numerous steps, including animal implantation of 1x105 GL261 cells and imaging using a 9.4 Tesla horizontal bore small animal NMR scanner. The researchers used dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging to assess vascular permeability and used blood pool imaging pre- and post-injections of iron oxide nanoparticles to validate their T2*-w sequence with an iron-based contrast agent. Researchers were able to identify single vessels in glioma development and quantified neovessels over time, as well as resolve the tumor microvasculature using ultramicroscopy. They found that pharmacological VEGF inhibition leads to a partial vascular normalization with decreased vessel caliber, density, and permeability.
Researchers have found that naïve human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) can directly give rise to human trophoblast stem cells (hTSCs), which can differentiate into extravillous and syncytiotrophoblast, while primed hPSCs only give rise to non-self-renewing cytotrophoblasts in response to BMP4. This research offers insight into the early mechanisms that govern normal human trophoblast development and pathologies. The study also shows that naïve hPSCs directly gave rise to a uniform population of cells resembling hTSCs, while primed hPSCs exhibited increased expression of VIM and PAX6, suggesting the acquisition of a neuroectodermal fate.
Researchers have discovered that during cell division, the activation of the protein phosphatase PP2A-B55, essential for progression through mitosis, relies on the inactivation of the cyclin B-dependent kinase Cdk1. By studying human cells, they found that during mitosis exit, the Fcp1 phosphatase coordinates with Cdk1 and Greatwall kinase to promote the dephosphoryation of Gwl kinase sites, which reduces its activity towards Ensa/ARPP19 proteins and promotes PP2A-B55 activation. Failing to dephosphorylate at mitosis exit could impact spindle breakdown, nuclear membrane reassembly and cytokinesis. The team also found that Fcp1 was required for pT481-PRC1 and bulk K/HpSP motif dephosphorylations, indicating that PP2A-B55 activation may require Fcp1 downstream Cdk1 inactivation.
Researchers have identified the key genes involved in the production of cuticular hydrocarbons (CHC) in the African malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae, which impact traits including adaptation to arid environments and defence against pathogens and toxins. CHCs protect insects from desiccation and infections, and act as mating recognition signals. The finding is important because mosquito populations are becoming resistant to insecticides, which is a major concern for vector control strategies as it threatens the efficiency of insecticide treated nets, that have proven successful in reducing the malaria burden in Africa. The study used a transgenic line with fluorescent oenocytes to purify mosquito cells for the first time, and revealed the enrichment of biological processes related to long chain fatty acyl-CoA biosynthesis and elongation of mono-, poly-unsaturated and saturated fatty acids.
The molecular identity of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) is not yet known. However, the paper shows that Bax and Bak, which are central regulators of apoptotic cell death, are crucial for MPTP-dependent necrotic cell death by controlling the permeability of the outer membrane. Loss of Bax/Bak results in resistance to mitochondrial calcium overload and necrotic cell death, and restoration with mutants of Bax that cannot form apoptotic pores, but still enhance outer membrane permeability, permits MPTP-dependent mitochondrial swelling and necrotic cell death. The MPTP is an inner membrane regulated process, and cyclophilin D (CypD) regulates the inner membrane complex. Previous studies had suggested, but not conclusively, a role for Bax/Bak in the regulation or formation of the MPTP. Here, the authors determine that Bax/Bak are required for mitochondrial permeability dependent cell death, serving as a necessary functional component of the MPTP.
Cholera toxin (CT) is known to enter host cells by binding to ganglioside GM1, but it was unclear whether other glycoproteins played a role. However, recent research has shown that fucosylated glycoproteins in colonic epithelial cell lines play a role in CT binding and subsequent entry into host cells. The research also identified one such glycoprotein, CEACAM5, and noted that the fucosylated structures promote CT entry into colonic epithelial cell lines. The research sheds new light on the mechanisms by which CT enters and intoxicates host cells, and it has important implications for the interpretation of experiments where CTB is used to study the organization of lipids in the plasma membrane.
A new study shows that targeting DsbA, a protein that regulates the formation of disulfide bonds in Gram-negative bacteria, can disable diverse bacterial antibiotic resistance mechanisms. The researchers found that inhibiting DsbA enhances the effectiveness of existing antibiotics, and the absence of DsbA substantially increases the survival of organisms infected with multidrug-resistant bacteria. The findings suggest that developing novel antibiotic adjuvants that function as broad-acting resistance breakers could be a promising avenue for the development of next-generation therapeutic approaches.
Scientists have found a way to make T cells safer for cancer patients by preventing the mispairing of introduced and existing T cells that can lead to autoimmune reactions. The T cells are engineered to express a cancer-fighting T cell receptor (TCR) and re-infused into a patient. However, the introduced TCR can mispair with the existing TCR and reduce the level of correctly-paired, tumor-reactive TCR. Mispairing can also lead to self-reactive TCR that do not undergo thymic negative selection and cause autoreactivity in TCR-transduced human T cells. The researchers have developed domain-swapped TCRs that can prevent mispairing and can be applied generally to human and mouse TCRs.
Periodontal disease is a condition associated with aging and characterized by the loss of periodontal bone, inflammation of the tissues surrounding the tooth, and changes in the microbiome. Current treatments only focus on prevention or tooth extraction because there is no cure for periodontal disease. However, a study shows that short-term treatment with the FDA-approved drug rapamycin can rejuvenate the oral cavity of elderly mice, including the regeneration of periodontal bone and attenuation of inflammation, and return the microbiome to a more youthful state. Aging is also associated with increased risk of diseases, and interventions that target aging hallmarks have been shown to delay or prevent age-related disorders in model organisms. Rapamycin extends lifespan and treats age-related phenotypes in multiple organisms, including mice, by inhibiting the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex I (mTORC1). The study suggests a geroscience strategy to potentially reverse periodontal disease in the elderly.
Plants can release herbivory-induced plant volatiles (HIPVs) which can attract enemies of herbivores; this serves as an indirect defense by increasing the plants' fitness through successful reproduction. However, it remains unclear whether HIPVs truly increase plant fitness in nature, as other animals and competing plants can intercept HIPVs for their own use. In a field study, HIPV-emitting N. attenuata plants produced twice as many buds and flowers as HIPV-silenced plants, but only when native predators reduced herbivore loads. TPI-producing plants were not fitter than TPI-silenced plants, but TPIs weakened a specialist herbivore's behavioral evasive responses to simulated Geocoris spp. attack, indicating that TPIs function against specialists by enhancing indirect defense. Long-term field studies comparing HIPV-emitting vs deficient plants are needed to demonstrate a defensive function for HIPVs.
This study examined the genetic epidemiology of dengue viruses in two phase III trials of the CYD-TDV dengue vaccine in 10 endemic countries. The findings suggest that there is limited genotype-level heterogeneity in older children, but post-licensure surveillance is needed to monitor vaccine performance against the backdrop of DENV sequence diversity and evolution. The study also found that vaccine efficacy varied according to age, baseline serostatus, and virus serotype, and there was evidence of reduced efficacy against DENV-2 in the Asian phase III trial compared to the Latin American trial. The study offers insights into the characteristics of the CYD-TDV product relative to contemporary DENV populations and provides preliminary insight into genotype-level vaccine efficacy that can serve as a baseline for future research.
Myopathies reduce muscle function and are often caused by mutations in ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1), which can lead to central core disease (CCD). In this study, the RyR1 mutation is linked to a decrease in calcium release and ATP production, causing muscle weakness and a persistent potassium leak. By inhibiting KATP channels or increasing interstitial potassium levels, muscle function can be reversed. The study identifies regulators of potassium homeostasis as possible therapeutic targets for myopathies due to certain RyR1 mutations. In addition, an animal model for CCD that displays muscle weakness and core-like structures is also described. These findings suggest that improving potassium homeostasis may protect muscles from damage due to certain RyR1 mutations.
A protein known as AGR2, which is a soluble protein-disulfide isomerase involved in Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) protein folding and quality control, plays a crucial role in the regulation of epithelial tissue architecture and preneoplastic phenotype. AGR2 is secreted and interacts with the Extracellular Matrix (ECM) as a functionally active protein independently of its thioredoxin-like domain and ER-retention domain. It is implicated in the acquisition of invasive and metastatic characteristics of tumours. AGR2 was found to be overexpressed in lung cancer tumour tissue and correlated with poor patient prognosis. The study confirms that eAGR2 plays an extracellular role independent of its ER function in the regulation of epithelial morphogenesis and tumorigenesis, acting as a critical ECM microenvironmental pro-oncogenic regulator.
Researchers have used the genetically encoded dopamine sensor dLight1 to monitor dopaminergic neurotransmission in the ventral striatum of mice with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). They found that NF1 mice had reduced spontaneous dopaminergic neurotransmission that was associated with an excitation/inhibition imbalance in the ventral tegmental area and abnormal neuronal morphology. NF1 mice also had more robust dopaminergic and behavioral responses to salient visual stimuli, which were independent of learning and rescued by optogenetic inhibition of non-dopaminergic neurons in the VTA. The study provides a first in vivo characterization of dopaminergic circuit function in the context of NF1 and reveals novel pathophysiological mechanisms. NF1 is an autosomal dominant disorder that affects approximately 1 in 3500 individuals worldwide and is caused by loss of one functional copy of the NF1 gene on chromosome 17. The disorder affects pigmentary lesions, neoplasia, cognitive and learning disabilities, peripheral neuropathy, musculoskeletal abnormalities, and gross and fine motor delays. Approximately one-third of patients with NF1 meet DSM-V criteria for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
A recent study claiming that there is no correlation between gene copy number and gene expression in natural variants of the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is contradicted by a reevaluation of the data. It is clear that changes in gene copy number result in changes in gene expression at the transcription level. It is suggested that “dosage compensation mechanisms that buffer gene amplifications” protect against the adverse effects of aneuploidy (chromosomal imbalances). The results suggest that dosage compensation is a rare occurrence in both the laboratory and natural variants of S. cerevisiae. The study indicates that aneuploidies (whole chromosome gains and losses) are prevalent, stable and well-tolerated in yeast strains, but they cause the down-regulation of genes and generally have a negative impact on fitness.
Actin-related protein 2/3 (Arp2/3) complex activation by nucleation promoting factors (NPFs) plays an important role in actin-mediated cellular processes such as endocytosis. This study uses genetics and live-cell imaging to investigate how NPFs regulate actin assembly onset at endocytic sites in yeast. The study demonstrates that multivalent linker proteins containing SH3 (Src homology 3)-PRM (proline-rich motif) interactions play central roles in concentrating NPFs at endocytic sites and WASP and WIP play central roles in building a network for actin assembly initiation. The Pan1-End3-Sla1 complex interacts with numerous proteins throughout endocytosis but specific domains such as the first two SH3 domains of Sla1 and the PRD of Pan1 provide a crucial role for cell growth. However, the absence of the domains at endocytic sites does not affect expression or recruitment. The severe synthetic growth defect of an sla1W41AW108A pan1∆PRD double mutant is caused by the loss of specific functions rather than by the absence of the mutant proteins at endocytic sites. The study provides mechanistic insights into spatiotemporal regulation of actin assembly in vivo.
Animals have evolved an ability to evaluate food quality, allowing them to avoid food lacking essential nutrients or containing toxic molecules. This evaluation system is not just regulated by neuronal sensory systems but is also initiated in the intestine. It is unknown how this system detects specific micronutrients such as vitamins, and the mechanisms underlying detection and regulation of downstream physiological responses remain largely unexplored. A team of researchers has established a system to analyze the C. elegans intestinal response to vitamin B2 deficiency, and have demonstrated that this vitamin is crucial for regulating specific protease gene expression and intestinal protease activity, which in turn impact food uptake and foraging behavior. The study uncovers a vitamin B2-sensing/response pathway that regulates food uptake mediated through the TORC1 signaling pathway, and highlights the importance of gut microbiota in supplying micronutrients to animals.
The relationship between human transcript diversity and protein production is complicated by the fact that each isoform of a transcript can be translated differently. In order to determine the regulatory features that control ribosome occupancy and translational output of each transcript isoform, researchers fractionated a polysome profile and reconstructed transcript isoforms from each fraction using Transcript Isoforms in Polysomes sequencing (TrIP-seq). Among the features tested, properties of 3′ untranslated regions predominated over the 5′ leader sequence as the driving force behind differential polysome association for transcript isoforms of the same gene. Sequencing only the ends of transcripts cannot distinguish between different isoforms of the same gene, but TrIP-seq analysis demonstrated the large dynamic range of transcript-isoform-specific translational control. These findings provide a lens through which to ascribe functional consequences to RNA-seq-generated transcriptomes, uncover regulatory elements that can be utilized to tune translation of synthetic messages robustly in cells, and demonstrate that transcript isoform diversity must be considered when relating RNA and protein levels.
The Interaction- and Trade-off-based Eco-Evolutionary Model (ITEEM) is a minimalist model that examines eco-evolutionary dynamics and the impact of life-history trade-offs on those dynamics. The model simulates diverse communities of organisms that diversify from one ancestor by gradual changes in their interaction traits and compete under Lotka-Volterra dynamics in a well-mixed, closed system. The model demonstrates the natural emergence of diversity and self-organization towards structured communities with high and sustained diversity, in which competing species form interaction cycles similar to rock-paper-scissors games. The shape of the life-history trade-off has a fundamental impact on eco-evolutionary dynamics, and despite its minimalism, ITEEM produces a remarkable range of patterns of eco-evolutionary dynamics that are observed in experimental and natural systems.
Prp3 is an essential protein for pre-mRNA splicing but its functions and molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. Researchers have found that Prp3 contains a bipartite U4/U6 di-snRNA-binding region that interacts specifically with single-stranded RNA. This protein region cooperates with other spliceosome-specific RNA interaction modules and inhibits Brr2-mediated U4/U6 di-snRNA unwinding. RNP-disrupting mutations in Prp3 have been
A new study has analysed mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in 22 different types of cancer, finding that some cancers have significantly lower levels of mtDNA than healthy tissues. These depleted cancers include bladder, breast and kidney, whereas lung adenocarcinomas were found to have significantly increased levels. The study also found that some metabolic pathways can compensate by producing increased energy. The study highlights the importance of investigating the mtDNA copy number more thoroughly for a better understanding of how mitochondria affect cancer progression.
This study investigated stem cell divisions in the human hematopoietic system throughout life and analysed the telomere length distributions underlying stem cell behavior within individuals. The researchers developed a mathematical model that showed how these distributions contain a fingerprint of the progressive telomere loss and the fraction of symmetric cell proliferations. The model was tested against measured telomere length distributions in humans across all ages and confirmed increasing stem cell pools during childhood and adolescence and an approximately maintained stem cell population in adults. The model also allowed for the detection of abnormal stem cell dynamics, which could affect the risk of stem cell-related diseases. The study's mathematical model recovers the temporal change of telomere length distributions in human hematopoietic cells with a minimal number of required model parameters. The paper discusses how the model can be assessed on three different levels of resolution, the levels of the single telomere, single cells, and tissue.
Researchers have developed a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of colorectal cancer (CRC) liver metastasis that is capable of predicting patient survival outcomes. By performing liver-specific in vivo selection on PDXs, the researchers identified the gluconeogenesis enzyme PCK1 as a driver of liver metastatic colonization that is over-expressed in metastatic CRC. PCK1 enhances pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis, which enables cancer cell growth in the context of hypoxia. Highly metastatic CRC PDXs contained higher levels of intermediary metabolite precursors for pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. Molecular and pharmacological inhibition of PCK1 or the pyrimidine biosynthetic gene DHODH inhibited CRC liver metastatic colonization. The researchers also identified other candidate liver colonization promoting genes that were highly upregulated in liver metastatic derivatives.
The biotrophic fungus Ustilago maydis causes smut disease in maize by inducing characteristic tumor formation and anthocyanin biosynthesis. It has been found that the virulence promoting secreted effector protein Tin2 induces anthocyanin biosynthesis by interacting with maize protein kinase ZmTTK1. Tin2 masks a ubiquitin–proteasome degradation motif in ZmTTK1, stabilizing the active kinase that controls the activation of genes in the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway. Without Tin2, enhanced lignin biosynthesis occurs in infected tissue and vascular bundles show strong lignification. Tin2 re-wires metabolites into the anthocyanin pathway to limit their availability for other defence responses. During biotrophic growth, the fungus regulates a high-affinity fungal sucrose H+ symporter, Srt1 to obtain nutrients from veins. Tin2 induces anthocyanin biosynthesis as a strategy to compete with tissue lignification and gain access to veins.
The document discusses how the human T cell repertoire is shaped by exposures to many antigens over a lifetime. Using mathematical modeling and T cell receptor sequencing data, the document develops a theory of human T cell dynamics and finds that clonal expansions during a perinatal time window leave a long-lasting imprint on the human T cell repertoire. The document also discusses the heavy-tailed clone size distribution and the power-law scaling of clone sizes in T cell repertoires. The power-law distributed hierarchy of clone sizes emerges from clonal expansions during repertoire formation early in life. A minimal model of repertoire formation based on T cell biology showed that large clones displayed power-law scaling, and the power-law tail persisted over multiple decades of aging. Finally, the document provides intuitive insight into how scaling is established using a continuum theory of clonal dynamics during repertoire growth.
Researchers have identified a secreted protein, Aeromonas Immune Modulator A (AimA), which helps prevent excessive inflammation in the gut of zebrafish, thereby promoting mutualism between the host and bacteria. The team used a gnotobiotic larval zebrafish model and discovered that AimA is required to prevent inflammation in the intestine that could harm both bacterial mutualists and hosts. The team found that administering exogenous AimA prevents excessive intestinal neutrophil accumulation and protects against septic shock in models of chemically induced intestinal inflammation. Structural analysis of AimA revealed two related calycin-like domains with structural similarity to lipocalin-2, a mammalian immune modulatory protein.
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has a compact genome and is a useful model for studying gene regulation. However, identifying regulatory elements in this species has been limited due to a lack of knowledge about DNA-binding motifs for transcription factors. To address this, researchers performed protein binding microarray experiments on a diverse set of transcription factors and obtained motifs for 129 of them. Additionally, they predicted motifs for many other transcription factors with DNA-binding domains similar to those already characterized, increasing the coverage of binding specificities to around 40%. These data highlight the diversification of binding motifs for certain TF families and reveal unexpected diversity of motifs for other families. The researchers suggest that their study not only expands knowledge about C. elegans TF sequence specificities, but also identifies putative regulatory roles for previously unstudied TFs.
A new study has found that ultra-high magnetic fields of above 20 T can change the orientation and morphology of mitotic spindles in mammalian cells. The mitotic spindle is responsible for chromosome segregation and cleavage furrow positioning during cell division. Spindle orientation is key to cell fate determination and tissue architecture. The study also highlights that microtubules and chromosomes are both affected by magnetic torque, with the direction of spindle alignment relative to the field being dependent more on chromosome alignment than microtubules. The study can provide a tool to probe the role of spindle orientation and perturbation in developmental and cancer biology. The study used custom-made cell incubation systems to accommodate cells in the ultra-high field magnet needed for the study, and did not find any immediate cytotoxicity effects of applying a 27 T SMF for four hours.
Researchers conducted a genome-wide association study to investigate the bacterial genetic basis of pyomyositis, a severe bacterial infection that commonly affects children in tropical regions. They found a strong relationship between bacterial genetic variation and pyomyositis, with estimated heritability of 63.8% and identified the presence of the Panton-Valentine leucocidin (PVL) locus as a significant factor increasing the odds of pyomyositis 130-fold. The study demonstrated the potential for association studies to identify specific bacterial genes involved in the pathogenesis of severe human disease.
The mechanisms that regulate growth and size of the regenerating limb in tetrapods such as the Mexican axolotl are unknown. In the current study, researchers have found that signaling from the limb nerves is required for the maintenance of the growth and size of the limb, and non-neural extrinsic factors from differently sized host animals do not play a prominent role in determining the size of the regenerating limb. It was discovered that the regulation of limb size is not autonomously regulated by the limb nerves, but that they provide essential cues to regulate ontogenetic allometric growth and the final size of the regenerating limb. The study sheds light on the molecular mechanisms that regulate the growth of the regenerate until it has completed regeneration.
The CRISPR system in bacteria and archaea uses Cas proteins to defend against viral infection by integrating fragments of invader DNA as spacers in the CRISPR array. Cas1 and Cas2 form a complex that catalyzes spacer integration, but the precise mechanism for acquiring spacers and removing the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) remains unclear. Recent studies have implicated Cas4 in PAM-dependent prespacer processing, but direct biochemical and structural evidence for the Cas4-Cas1-Cas2 complex was needed. Researchers have now shown through single-particle negative-stain electron microscopy that Cas4 forms a complex with Cas1-Cas2 in the presence of dsDNA, and that the Cas4-Cas1-Cas2 complex processes single-strand DNA when an activator duplex DNA is provided in trans. They found that the complex is highly specific for PAM sequences and cleaves precisely upstream of the PAM. The molecular architecture of the complexes was determined using 3D reconstruction and the Cas4-Cas1-Cas2 complex was found to have two possible stoichiometries (symmetrical and asymmetrical). The Cas4 and Cas1 densities are contiguous but Cas4 appears to be distinct from the Cas2 density. The proximity between Cas4 and the Cas1 active site suggests that the product of Cas4 cleavage could transit to the integrase active sites following cleavage.
A study used a robotic system to simulate human standing and imposed sensorimotor delays into the control of balance. The imposed delays destabilized standing, but through training, participants adapted and re-learned to balance with the delays. Before training, the imposed delays attenuated vestibular contributions to balance and triggered perceptions of unexpected standing motion, suggesting increased uncertainty in the internal self-motion estimates. After training, vestibular contributions partially returned to baseline levels and larger delays were needed to evoke perceptions of unexpected standing motion. The nervous system learns and maintains motor skills by forming probabilistic estimates of self-motion. Through repeated exposure to an imposed delay, the brain can learn to expect the delayed feedback associated with self-motion, leading to improvements in movement control with delays up to 430 ms.
A study in eLife reports that it may be possible to create normal centrioles capable of duplication and ciliation in the absence of SAS-6 self-oligomerisation. Centrioles are ninefold symmetrical, microtubule-based structures essential for centrosome and cilia formation. In cycling cells, centrioles are formed and maintained through duplication depending on pre-existing (or mother) centrioles. The nature of de novo cartwheel assembly has not previously been determined. The study used CRISPR/Cas9 gene targeting to sequentially inactivate p53 and SAS-6 genes in retinal pigment epithelial cells. The Sas6-/- cells then surprisingly formed normal looking centrioles capable of duplication and ciliation. However, de novo centrioles were prone to structural errors, even in the presence of SAS-6 self-oligomerisation.
Naïve B cells produce two types of B-cell receptors (BCRs) called IgM and IgD, each with different constant regions.  IgM is downregulated on autoreactive B cells, however it is unknown how this imposes tolerance. Nur77-eGFP reporter mice were used to study the responsiveness of BCRs to antigens. The results suggest that IgD BCRs are less efficient than IgM in transmitting signals which triggers a response.  This creates quiescence in autoreactive B-cells and restricts their ability to differentiate into autoantibody secreting cells. It was observed that a diverse BCR repertoire of mature B-cells expressing IgM or IgD alone responded differently to endogenous antigens. IgD BCRs induced less Nur77-eGFP than IgM BCRs. The findings indicate that IgD BCRs restrict the differentiation of autoreactive B cells into autoantibody secreting cells because IgD-expression maintains the quiescence of autoreactive B cells in response to chronic endogenous antigen stimulation.
The AGameOfClones vector concept uses two transformation markers to identify the genotype of transgenic organisms, leading to the systematic creation of homozygous lines. This approach is expected to work in all diploid model organisms, and saves resources and simplifies handling. The method relies on the Cre-Lox system and proves successful in Tribolium castaneum, producing multiple functional homozygous transgenic lines suitable for long-term fluorescence live imaging. The approach avoids the use of invasive genetic assays and temporary ambiguities, leading to quicker and more efficient transgenic organism handling. The functionality of the AGOC vector concept should work in all diploid model organisms.
The document describes the mechanism of AAA+ motors in degrading proteins. It focuses on understanding how the motor produces grip when resisting a folded domain. The study identifies the determinants of grip at the amino acid level by measuring how substrate tail sequences alter the unfolding activity of the unfoldase-protease ClpXP. It is found that ClpX grips large hydrophobic and aromatic side chains strongly and small, polar, or charged side chains weakly. Multiple side chains interact with pore loops synergistically to strengthen grip. The study provides unprecedented detail into the mechanism by which AAA+ motors grip terminal substrate tails during protein unfolding.
This document discusses the impact of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) on bacterial evolution. HGT can lead to rapid changes in gene content, allowing bacteria to adapt quickly to new environments, but it also carries risks such as selfish genetic elements (SGEs). The document presents a model for studying how HGT of slightly beneficial genes impacts growth rates of bacterial populations and whether bacterial collectives can evolve to take up DNA despite the risks of SGEs. The model identifies four classes of slightly beneficial genes: indispensable, enrichable, rescuable, and unrescuable genes. Rescuable genes can be collectively retained by a community that engages in costly HGT. The document also discusses the implications of HGT on population growth rates and distinguishes genes into five classes based on their requirement for HGT and their impact on population growth rates. The study further explores the evolution of DNA uptake and finds that HGT is an evolutionarily stable strategy for enrichable and rescuable genes but not for unrescuable genes. In a spatially explicit, eco-evolutionary context, the study finds that gene classes shift to higher values of benefit when mixing is decreased. These insights provide a better understanding of how slightly beneficial genes may spread or fail to spread in evolving microbial populations.
Scientists have identified the molecular mechanism that allows plants to recognise and defend themselves against fungal infections, publishing their findings in a paper in eLife. By studying the disease rice blast, which is the biggest pre-harvest biotic threat to global rice production, and how rice plants resist it through the deployment of two genes that encode intracellular immune receptors known as nucleotide-binding leucine-rich-repeat (NLR) receptors, scientists were able to determine the way in which the resistance occurs. The sustainability of rice production is critical, with it being a staple food crop in every country.
Cdc42 is a signaling protein crucial for the reorganization of actin cytoskeleton and morphogenesis of cells. However, its role in synaptic plasticity and behaviors such as learning and memory are not well understood. Here, researchers report that deletion of Cdc42 postnatally leads to deficits in synaptic plasticity and remote memory recall. Loss of Cdc42 did not affect memory acquisition but significantly impaired remote memory recall, indicating that postnatal functions of Cdc42 may be crucial for the synaptic plasticity of hippocampal neurons. Cdc42 is required for structural and functional plasticity of dendritic spines, and its loss leads to impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP). However, deletion of Cdc42 does not affect body weight and does not have an impact on other behaviors, including the Y-maze test for working memory.
The document describes a discovery in Caenorhabditis elegans of glial cells actively engulfing neuron fragments, specifically endings of the AFD thermosensory neuron. The process is regulated by temperature and glial CED-10 levels, and involves the use of components of the conserved apoptotic corpse phagocytosis machinery to initiate engulfment. Glial engulfment rates downstream of neuron activity have profound consequences on neuron shape and animal sensory behavior. The study suggests that other glia may similarly use regulated phagocytosis to tune sensory neuron receptive endings and synapses and modulate adult animal behavior.
Swine influenza is a significant disease for pig populations and has the potential to become a pandemic for humans. The diversity of H1 and H3 influenza viruses in swine is not fully understood, but recent research has quantified the antigenic diversity of swine influenza viruses on a global scale. The diversity of recently circulating viruses adds complexity to the risk profile of swine and the potential for swine-derived infections in humans. Swine are a mixing vessel for influenza viruses and have been the source of a pandemic human virus. There are three dominant subtypes of influenza A viruses circulating in swine: H1N1, H1N2, and H3N2. Genetic diversity and multi-species origins of influenza viruses in swine pose a threat to swine populations' health and may spread to other populations. Antigenic data is crucial in assessing the phenotype of the virus and designing antigenically well-matched vaccines. In order to fill the knowledge gap, the largest and most geographically comprehensive antigenic dataset of swine influenza viruses was compiled to date. The study quantified the antigenic diversity of influenza viruses circulating in humans and swine and generated a framework for exploring the antigenic component of risk of introduction of influenza A viruses. The diversity of H1 and H3 influenza viruses in swine is inconsistent in relation to their antigenic clustering and genetic lineage through time with occasional emergence of new antigenic variants. There are unique patterns of antigenic evolution within individual lineages in different geographic regions.
Platynereis dumerilii, a marine annelid, has been used as a model organism to investigate the ciliomotor circuitry of coordinated ciliary arrests and beating in multiciliated surfaces, found in many eukaryotes. The study identified cholinergic, serotonergic and catecholaminergic ciliomotor neurons and revealed that the synchronous rhythmic activation of cholinergic cells drives the coordinated arrests of all cilia. The serotonergic cells are active when cilia are beating, inhibiting the cholinergic rhythm and increasing ciliary beat frequency. The ciliomotor circuitry constitutes a stop-and-go pacemaker system for the whole-body coordination of ciliary locomotion. Multiciliated surfaces characterised by many beating cilia generate fluid flow or drive locomotion. Metachronal waves are energetically efficient and have a higher efficiency of flow generation than non-metachronal beating. However, biophysical mechanisms alone cannot explain all aspects of ciliary beat synchronisation, which is often under neuronal control. To investigate beat coordination across the ciliary bands in Platynereis, the study combined differential interference contrast (DIC) imaging with calcium imaging using a ubiquitously expressed fluorescent calcium indicator, GCaMP6s. The study identified 11 cholinergic ciliomotor neurons in the larva, including the previously described six ventral decussating cholinergic motorneurons and two rhabdomeric photoreceptor cells of the larval eyespots.
Mutant huntingtin protein causes cell death and aggregation, which is inhibited by the eukaryotic chaperonin TRiC in vitro and in vivo. Using cryo-electron microscopy, the researchers characterized the growth of fibrillar aggregates of mutant huntingtin exon 1 containing an expanded polyglutamine tract with 51 residues and resolved 3-D structures of TRiC interacting with the mutant. They found that TRiC caps mutant huntingtin fibril tips and encapsulates smaller mutant huntingtin oligomers within its chamber, providing a structural description of how TRiC inhibits mutant huntingtin aggregation.
This article discusses new findings regarding the function and activation of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk), which is essential for B-cell function. The article presents crystallographic and biochemical analyses revealing details about its autoinhibition and activation. The lipid-binding PH-TH module, unique to Tec kinases, stabilizes the inactive conformation of Btk. The activation of Btk is primarily expected to be triggered by membranes containing phosphatidylinositol triphosphate (PIP3), which is produced as a consequence of receptor activation. However, the article reveals that inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) can also activate Btk. This activation occurs via a transient PH-TH dimerization induced by IP6, which promotes transphosphorylation of the kinase domains. The PH-TH module can also stabilize the inactive conformation of the kinase by interacting with the N lobe. Furthermore, the article discusses the tyrosine phosphorylation events that lead to activation of B and T lymphocytes.
The Thermoplasma acidophilum homologue of eukaryotic CDC48/p97, called VAT, is involved in degrading misfolded proteins in conjunction with the proteasome. The process through which AAA+ unfoldases, such as VAT, unfold substrates through their hexameric structures is unknown. With the removal of VAT's regulatory N-terminal domains, the presence of ATP allowed VAT to unfold other VAT complexes as substrate. The resulting images captured through electron cryomicroscopy revealed the breaking of the six-fold symmetry of the complex, enabling the VAT subunits to grip an approximately 80 Å stretch of unfolded protein, suggesting a processive hand-over-hand unfolding mechanism. The electron microscopy density maps are deposited in the Electron Microscopy Databank under accession codes EMD-8658 and EMD-8659. The atomic models are deposited in the Protein Databank under accession codes 5VC7 and 5VCA. The expected activity of VAT complexes prepared by mixing different ratios of wild type and mutant protomers is defined as r- the probability of any protomer in the hexamer being a mutant- and can be calculated from the concentration of mutant VAT protomers that are mixed with the wild type. Experimentally, it was observed that ATP hydrolysis rates decreased rapidly with r.
The human pathogen Chlamydia trachomatis grows in a vacuole, but how it accumulates glycogen there is unknown. This study finds that host glycogen stores shift to the vacuole through two pathways: bulk uptake from the cytoplasmic pool, and de novo synthesis. Bacterial glycogen metabolism enzymes are also secreted into the vacuole lumen through type 3 secretion. The findings suggest that parasitophorous vacuoles not only offer protection, but also provide a microorganism-controlled metabolically active compartment essential for redirecting host resources to the pathogens.
The size of the readily releasable vesicles (RRP) pool and the probability of release (P) of each RRP vesicle determine synaptic strength at the presynaptic nerve terminal. ELKS proteins are enriched at vertebrate active zones and enhance P at inhibitory hippocampal synapses, but their functions at excitatory synapses are unknown. Conditional knockout mice for ELKS were used to study its effects at excitatory synapses in hippocampal neurons. Results showed that ELKS enhanced the RRP at excitatory synapses without affecting P. The C-terminal sequences of ELKS were found to be dispensable for RRP enhancement while the N-terminal coiled-coil domains that bind to Liprin-α and Bassoon were necessary to control RRP. The study reveals important roles for ELKS N-terminal domains in synaptic vesicle priming. ELKS1α/2α are co-expressed at excitatory synapses and are thought to control the size of the RRP at such synapses. The distribution of individual ELKS proteins at excitatory and inhibitory synapses were found to be positively correlated. ELKS1α/2α knockout reduced excitatory transmission in hippocampal neurons by affecting the presynaptic RRP size. The effect was not presynaptic and effects on EPSC rise times were not observed, indicating that ELKS operates differently at excitatory synapses than at inhibitory synapses.
Recent research suggests that fast neurotransmitters are often co-released with slow neuromodulators in the brain. A study conducted by The University of California has shown that cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain of the brain may use normally overlooked γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in addition to the classical transmitter acetylcholine (ACh) in signalling. By selectively activating cholinergic fibres in the cortex, researchers discovered not only the expected excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) mediated by nAChRs but also IPSCs mediated by GABAA receptors. The experiments suggest that GABA/ACh co-release may have major implications for modulation of cortical function by cholinergic neurons.
In this study, researchers examined the longitudinal trajectories, correlations, and mortality associations of nine biological age measurements (BAs) across a 20-year follow-up period in a Swedish population-based cohort. These BAs included telomere length, DNA methylation age estimators (DNAmAges), physiological age, cognitive function, functional aging index, and frailty index. They found that all BAs were correlated to varying degrees, with correlations mostly explained by chronological age (CA). Individually, all BAs except for telomere length were associated with mortality risk independently of CA, with the largest effects seen for methylation age estimators and the frailty index. In joint models, two methylation age estimators and the frailty index remained predictive, suggesting they are complementary in predicting mortality. The study adds to the knowledge gap in the field by examining longitudinal profiles of multiple BAs in the same population and comparing them with mortality risk.
The study focuses on understanding the internal architecture and cis-regulatory grammar of enhancers, which are distally-acting sequences that regulate the expression of developmental genes in metazoans. The study used an extensive, quantitative perturbation analysis targeting the dorsal-ventral patterning gene regulatory network, controlled by Drosophila NF-κB homolog Dorsal, in order to understand transcription factor interactions on enhancers. The study employed an ensemble of mathematical models to test the effects of cooperativity, repression, and factor potency, creating a comprehensive set of thermodynamic models. The study concluded that the collective predictions of sets of models were effective at novel enhancer identification and characterization, which may provide researchers with powerful tools to better understand the significance of genetic variation observed within and between species.
A new study from Denmark has found that colectomy, or the removal of the colon, is associated with an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes. The study, which used nationwide register data, compared patients who had undergone colectomy with those who had undergone other surgeries not involving the gastrointestinal tract. Patients who had undergone total colectomy had a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes compared to those who had not undergone colectomy. The study suggests that the left colon may play a role in maintaining glucose homeostasis. The study's findings also highlight the importance of the gut microbiota and glucagon-like peptide 1 secreting cells in regulating glucose levels.
RirA is an iron-responsive regulator that is present in Rhizobium and other α-proteobacteria. It regulates iron homeostasis by binding to IRO Box sequences upstream of RirA-regulated genes, which represses iron uptake. The regulator contains a [4Fe-4S] cluster, which senses both iron and oxygen. The dissociation constant (Kd) for Fe2+ dissociation from [4Fe-4S]2+ to form [3Fe-4S]0, indicative of the key iron-sensing step, was determined to be ~3 µM, consistent with the sensing of ‘free’ iron in the cytoplasm. O2 sensing, on the other hand, occurs through enhanced cluster degradation under aerobic conditions, via O2-mediated oxidation of the [3Fe-4S]0 intermediate to form [3Fe-4S]1+. The study employed time-resolved mass spectrometry and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to determine how the RirA cluster senses iron and O2 under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions. The data provide a comprehensive mechanistic and functional view of how RirA functions as an iron sensor and enables the cell to integrate iron and O2 signals.
Nucleotide-sugar transporters (NSTs) are important for glycosylation, the most common form of protein and lipid modification, and dysfunction of these transporters can lead to serious diseases. NSTs are also virulence factors for many pathogens and can be potential targets for therapeutic interventions, including cancer treatment. The first crystal structures of a mammalian NST, the mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter (mCST), have been presented, revealing how the transporter interacts with its substrates, and highlighting the mechanisms governing substrate selectivity as well as the structure-function relationship of NSTs.
Excitatory neurons play a crucial role in cerebellar development, and their absence can lead to motor disorders and cognitive difficulties in premature infants. Researchers used regional genetic manipulations and in vivo electrophysiology in mouse models to investigate how excitatory neurons affect the firing properties of Purkinje cells during postnatal development. They found that removing excitatory neurons prevented Purkinje cells from acquiring their typical morphology and connectivity and also impaired motor behavior and vocal skills. The study also argues that the late-term stage of cerebellar development is critical for the establishment of motor and non-motor circuitry required for complex cerebellar functions and behavior. The paper also highlights the correlation between abnormalities in cerebellar size and the incidence of cognitive disorders in premature infants.
Scientists have identified a new mechanism for regulating a key protein, Piezo2, which plays a critical role in the sense of touch in vertebrates. Changes in the protein myotubularin related protein-2 (Mtmr2) levels were found to control Piezo2-mediated rapidly adapting mechanically activated (RA-MA) currents. Experiments found that Mtmr2-dependent Piezo2 inhibition involved depletion of phosphatidylinositol (PI) (3,5)P2. Furthermore, a PI(3,5)P2 binding region in Piezo2 was identified that confers sensitivity to Mtmr2. The research showed that this link between Mtmr2 activity and PI(3,5)P2 availability could control Piezo2 function in peripheral sensory neurons.

The article introduces the concept of Calcium-mediated Actin Reset (CaAR) as a rapid and transient actin rearrangement process in response to elevated intracellular calcium levels, which occurs in various mammalian cell types and is involved in cellular adaptations in response to acute signals and stress. CaAR drives the reorganization of actin and induces long-lasting changes in gene expression. The article provides detailed quantitative analysis and characterization of the kinetics and features of CaAR in various cell types, including MCF-7 breast cancer cells and HeLa cells. The study concludes that CaAR has important implications for various cellular processes including wound healing, inflammation, cell differentiation, and cancer progression.
The interplay between growth and lifespan in fluctuating environments can be advantageous to organisms, but trade-offs arise between cell size and proliferation that can shorten lifespan. Researchers have discovered a natural example of how this interplay between growth and lifespan can be epigenetically controlled by a RNA-modifying enzyme called Pus4/Trub which can act as a prion, transforming cell growth and survival by altering the translational program of cells. The [BIG+] state, which is heritable and reversible, allows cells to increase their proliferation rates at the cost of a shortened lifespan. The research team found evidence for Pus4-dependent epigenetic control of cell size in wild yeast, highlighting a potential mechanism that could be used to alter the relationship between cell size and proliferation according to differing needs in fluctuating environments.
This study used a phylogenetic framework to measure mRNA profiles in 15 yeast species and reconstructed the evolution of their modular regulatory programs along a timeline of growth on glucose over 300 million years. The study found that modules have diverged proportionally to phylogenetic distance, with prominent changes in gene regulation accompanying changes in lifestyle and ploidy, especially in carbon metabolism. Paralogs have significantly contributed to regulatory divergence, typically within a short window from their duplication. Paralogs from a whole-genome duplication (WGD) event have a uniquely substantial contribution that extends over a longer span. Similar patterns were found when analyzing the evolution of the heat shock regulatory program in eight of the species, suggesting that these are general evolutionary principles.
The process of chromatin assembly during DNA replication involves packaging DNA into nucleosomes containing histone proteins, which are disrupted and then re-assembled with newly synthesized histones and DNA. However, it is unclear why higher eukaryotes contain multiple core histone genes, how chromatin assembly is controlled, and how these processes are coordinated with cell cycle progression. A histone null mutation of Drosophila melanogaster has shown that histone supply levels regulate the length of S phase during the cell cycle, and lack of de novo histone supply causes a cell cycle arrest during G2 phase, preventing cells from entering mitosis. This suggests a novel cell cycle surveillance mechanism that monitors nucleosome assembly without involving DNA repair pathways.
New evidence suggests that when double-strand breaks (DSBs) occur in DNA, transcriptional inhibition is triggered in surrounding genetic material via resection of the DSB ends, which converts them from double-stranded to single-stranded DNA. RNA levels decreased in genes surrounding DSBs, regardless of strand direction. Transcriptional inhibition was triggered irrespective of locus or host species (tested in S. cerevisiae and human cells), and was associated with changes in chromatin structure. These findings could help explain causality between DSBs and chromosomal abnormalities associated with cancer and developmental defects.
The document discusses a multicenter study of 60 healthy humans, half of whom received general anesthesia for 3 hours, and half of whom served as awake controls. The study aimed to understand the recovery process of consciousness and cognition after anesthesia and its implications for neurobiological theories of consciousness and clinical investigations. The study found that recovery of cognitive function after anesthesia evolved over time and that executive function returned first, contrary to the initial hypothesis. The study also noted the importance of understanding recovery processes after brain network perturbations, as it could provide insight into the mechanisms by which consciousness and cognition are reconstituted after significant disruptions.
Unpaired ligands, which act via a GP130-like receptor to activate JAK/STAT signalling in Drosophila, are required for metabolic regulation in healthy adult Drosophila muscle. Adult muscles show basal JAK-STAT signalling activity in the absence of immune challenge, with plasmatocytes being an important source of this tonic signal. Loss of the dome receptor on adult muscles significantly reduces lifespan and causes metabolic pathology, resulting from hyperactivation of AKT and deregulation of metabolism. JAK/STAT signalling is critical in the regulation of many biological processes in animals including metabolic regulation in many tissues. The unpaired cytokine signal must be received in muscle to control AKT activity and metabolic homeostasis in Drosophila.
The TRPV1 ion channel expressed in sensory neurons is regulated by an array of stimuli, including temperature, chemical compounds, and mechanical stimuli. TRPV1 channels are highly permeable to Ca2+ and are subject to indirect regulation by G-protein coupled receptors and intracellular Ca2+. TRPV1 activity can be measured using fluorescent dyes and non-fluorescent Ca2+ chelators to record Ca2+ sparklets, which represent the influx of Ca2+ through open TRPV1 channels. Sparklets due to TRPV1 channels diffused laterally in the plasma membrane as they gated, and were highly variable in mobility from channel-to-channel and from cell-to-cell. Interestingly, the mobility of TRPV1 decreased upon channel activation by capsaicin, but only in the presence of extracellular Ca2+. This could act as a diffusion trap to concentrate channels in cell regions with high activity.
This study investigates how oskar (osk) mRNA is localized to the posterior pole of the Drosophila oocyte using Staufen, an RNA-binding protein, as a proxy for osk mRNA. The authors show that kinesin-1 and myosin-V compete to determine osk/Staufen localization. Kinesin-1 removes osk/Staufen from the cortex along microtubules, while myosin-V anchors osk/Staufen at the cortex. The outcome of the competition is primarily determined by cortical microtubule density. This study is the first to directly demonstrate that a change in myosin-V activity disrupts osk/Staufen posterior localization. The authors propose that the restoration of the posterior crescent is due to the positive feedback loop whereby enough Osk protein translates from the residual cap, initiating the positive feedback loop, while ooplasmic streaming circulates mislocalized osk/Staufen particles to the posterior cap, enhancing Osk localization. Overall, this study demonstrates that direct competition between an actin motor (myosin-V) and a microtubule motor (kinesin-1) controls posterior determinant localization in Drosophila oocytes, and the outcome of this competition is determined by the local density of cortical microtubules.
The vanishing white matter (VWM) is a neurological disease caused by eIF2B mutations that lead to persistent ISR induction in the central nervous system. However, the long-term treatment with a small molecule eIF2B activator, 2BAct, prevents all measures of pathology and normalizes the transcriptome and proteome of VWM mice, which opens the possibility of preventing the chronic ISR induction in a variety of disease contexts. VWM is defined by progressive loss of myelin and involves progressive ataxia, motor skill deficits, and shortened lifespan. Strikingly, 2BAct treatment maintains myelin levels at 91% and 85% of WT in the corpus callosum and spinal cord, respectively. Staining for myelin basic protein (MBP), an alternative measure of myelin content, corroborated these results in both regions. Thus, 2BAct-like molecules may provide a promising therapeutic approach for VWM treatment.
A study using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has revealed a topographical representation of amplitude modulation rate in the auditory cortex of awake macaques. The representation of this temporal dimension is organised in concentric bands of equal rates across the superior temporal plane in both hemispheres. The data suggest a continuous representation of modulation rate across several physiological areas, in contradiction to a separate representation of frequency within each area. The study confirms the well-established tonotopic pattern with multiple reversals of the frequency gradient that serve as a basis for the delineation of auditory fields in the primate auditory cortex. The study has implications for understanding how the brain analyses natural sounds.
The interactomes of molecules that handle metals in neurons should include novel metal homeostasis pathways, according to a new study. Researchers focused on copper and the transporter ATP7A because ATP7A null mutations cause neurodegeneration. ATP7A immunoaffinity chromatography was performed and 541 proteins co-isolating with ATP7A were identified. The ATP7A interactome concentrated gene products implicated in neurodegeneration and neurodevelopmental disorders. Changes in the expression of ATP7A and COG subunits in Drosophila neurons caused altered synapse development in larvae and copper-induced mortality of adult flies. The study finds that the ATP7A interactome encompasses a novel COG-dependent mechanism to control neuronal development and survival. Copper, iron and manganese act as micronutrients, but in excess behave as neurotoxicants.
A team of researchers has reported the direct observation of nonenzymatic RNA primer extension through time-resolved crystallography. Using this technology, the team was able to capture sequential molecular ‘snapshots’ that follow the progress of the nonenzymatic RNA polymerization reaction, which is crucial for the origin of life. They found that the observed conformation of the template-bound dinucleotide intermediate is pre-organized so as to favour the primer extension reaction. The researchers believe this technique of time-resolved X-ray crystallography could prove useful in answering other mechanistic questions regarding nonenzymatic RNA polymerization.
The lobula columnar (LC) neurons in fruit flies provide a connection between visual processing and higher brain regions. LC cells are identified by their projections to specific brain structures called optic glomeruli. These neurons are shown to respond to specific visual stimuli and evoke behaviors in the flies. The organization of LC target regions suggests that different cell types encode distinct features, similar to the projection pattern of olfactory receptor neurons. Understanding the functional properties of LC neurons may shed light on the visual processing of stimuli other than wide-field motion.
Myelination is important for rapid impulse propagation in the nervous system, but myelin-related disorders and aging cause impairments to the axon/myelin-unit. The molecular cause of many pathological features, including myelin outfoldings, was previously unknown. However, a recent study found that the presence of myelin outfoldings correlates with a loss of cytoskeletal septins in myelin. These filaments, which are regulated by phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) levels, help scaffold the axon/myelin-unit and facilitate fast nerve conduction. Deficiency of these filaments causes myelin outfoldings and reduced nerve conduction velocity. The study also found that myelin proteome alterations are common among mice lacking myelin proteins, and several septins are diminished in all analyzed mutants. The presence of myelin outfoldings correlates with the loss of myelin septins in three models of complex CNS pathology. SEPT8 immunogold was mostly associated with the innermost membrane of compact myelin in the adaxonal compartment of mature CNS myelin.
A study has identified a previously unknown network of filaments that connect the membrane protein TCR to the cell surface with actin molecular motors, which provide the propulsion needed by the immune response's first responder cells, known as T-cells. The work focussed on a protein, called WASP, that is known to control actin pumps. It was found that when WASP function is eliminated there is a negligible effect on filament construction at the immunological synapse, leading to gaps in understanding the process. The results of the study show that a fraction of total synaptic F-actin selectively generated by WASP as large F-actin “foci” greatly amplifies the downstream signals required for an optimal immune response.
Group II introns are rare in bacterial genomes and often coexist with mobile elements but rarely disrupt important genes. This makes their distribution puzzling. However, a study of Ll. LtrB, a group II intron found in a conjugative plasmid from Lactococcus lactis, shows that this intron inhibits gene expression and prevents conjugative horizontal transfer. Reduction in gene expression is due to the interaction between exon-binding sequences in the intron and intron-binding sequences in the mRNA. The spliced intron targets the mRNA and reopens ligated exons, causing significant mRNA loss. This discovery provides an explanation for the distribution of group II introns in bacteria and suggests a potential reason for these introns to evolve into spliceosomal introns.
Researchers have demonstrated coordinated structural and functional changes in excitatory synapses in the presence of all-trans retinoic acid (atRA) in human cortical slices. This finding reveals a link between synaptopodin and spine apparatus organelles in adult human cortex, and demonstrates that atRA is a mediator of ultrastructural and functional synaptic changes. The study also found that synaptopodin is required for atRA-mediated synaptic plasticity, and that the effects of atRA on excitatory neurotransmission depend on mRNA translation and protein synthesis. These findings provide insight into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of synaptic plasticity in the adult human cortex.
Inhibition is important in neural signal processing and shaping and limiting responses in the auditory system. The study uses in vivo experiments and analysis to demonstrate that inhibition is co-tuned with excitation and leads to a minor sharpening of the spectral response properties. Inhibition improves the temporal response fidelity of spherical bushy cells across a wide range of input intensities, providing the basis for high-fidelity signal processing. Inhibition functions as a gain control that renders the postsynaptic response sparser in time and more reproducible across trials, leading to an improved basis for high-fidelity signal processing in downstream nuclei crucial for sound localization, irrespective of the prevailing stimulus levels.
Closed-loop stimulation in mice has been used to assess the behavioural relevance of hippocampal theta rhythm. Through manipulating phase-specific information processing using closed-loop stimulation, one intervention enhanced performance for spatial navigation. The study found that encoding and retrieval of task-relevant information are most active at distinct phases of theta, and that a manipulation that targets a specific phase of theta could selectively modulate either process. Furthermore, the consequences of a phase-specific intervention should depend on the behavioural context. These results suggest that hippocampal outputs change throughout each cycle of theta, and the balance between the relative influence of the outside world and internal states on hippocampal outputs is strongly modulated as a function of theta phase.
Glycosyltransferases (GTs) are enzymes that transfer sugars from activated donors to a range of acceptors, and are found in all living organisms. The complexity and diversity of their functions are not yet fully understood, but a recent study has identified a common core among GT-A fold enzymes shared among diverse organisms. The study also delineated three hypervariable regions extending from the common core and identified convergent modes of substrate recognition in evolutionarily divergent families. Based on this, the researchers developed a machine learning framework for predicting donor specificity with nearly 90% accuracy, which they used to predict the donor specificity of understudied GTs. The findings provide a framework for investigating complex relationships connecting GT-A fold sequence, structure, function and regulation, which could have implications for understanding pathogenicity, metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases associated with abnormal GT functions.
The study investigates the role of orbital frontal cortex (OFC) in learning and decision-making using an incentive learning task in mice. It is found that OFC plays a crucial role in the experience-based updating of changes in outcome value, which in turn controls decision-making. Changes in motivational state induced by food restriction are found to increase the palatable value of sucrose, which is shown to retrieve the updated incentive value and increase seeking response rates. The study also examines negative incentive learning and finds that a state-dependent decrease in value alters action control.
Researchers have identified key regulators of a plant's membrane trafficking system, which is essential for cell growth and division. The ARF guanine-nucleotide exchange factors, BIG1-4, function redundantly and are critical to post-Golgi trafficking, late secretion from the trans-Golgi network, and transporting both endocytosed and newly synthesized proteins to the cell-division plane during cytokinesis. The proteins play a crucial role in ensuring cargo delivery to the division plane and completing the partitioning membrane on time. The researchers were able to identify the roles of BIG1-4 by engineering a BFA-resistant variant of the ARF-GEF protein, BIG4. BIG1-4 mediate both late secretory and vacuolar trafficking from the TGN and recruit the AP-1 adaptor complex.
Researchers have developed a deep learning-based software pipeline called 3DeeCellTracker that can segment and track cells in 3D + T images (three-dimensional time-lapse images) to extract their dynamic positions and activities. The software performed well in tracking over 100 cells in semi-immobilized and freely moving worm's brains, a naturally beating zebrafish heart, and over 1,000 cells in a 3D cultured tumor spheroid. The use of simulation to create training data for the deep learning component of the software allowed for flexible and robust tracking of cells in various 3D + T datasets. The software potentially enables the analysis of cellular dynamics that were previously difficult to investigate by revealing dynamic cell activities in image datasets that have been challenging to analyze.
The bearded dragon is a rare vertebrate species with both polyphyodont and monophyodont teeth and is an excellent model for understanding tooth regeneration due to its distinct dentition and regenerative capacities. The dental lamina and successional dental lamina are crucial for tooth renewal, and their patterning process involves a large number of yet uncharacterized dental genes. The bearded dragon also reveals a novel mechanism of continuous tooth replacement in vertebrates. The study provides insight into the genetic and developmental basis of tooth regeneration and may help design therapies for human dental disorders and tooth loss.
Researchers have identified the unique shape of cells in the cornified stratified epithelia of the mammalian epidermis in order to achieve homeostasis of the tight junction barrier. They found that the basic shape of TJ-bearing cells is a flattened Kelvin's tetrakaidecahedron (f-TKD), and in vivo live imaging further revealed the dynamic replacement of TJs on the edges of f-TKD cells that enables the TJ-bearing cells to translocate across the TJ barrier. They propose a spatiotemporal orchestration model of f-TKD cell turnover, where cell shape provides a fundamental basis for the barrier homeostasis and physical strength of cornified stratified epithelia. These findings could have implications for understanding skin disorders such as allergic diseases.
Researchers used zebrafish to study the neuron cells that regulate sleep/wake states, feeding, stress, and reward in the hypothalamic hypocretin/orexin (Hcrt) neurons. Using fluorescence cell sorting and RNA sequencing, the researchers were able to identify a cluster of Hcrt-neuron specific transcripts that are regulated by shared transcription factors. They also identified the specific role of the voltage-gated potassium channel Kcnh4a in regulating sleep architecture. The study provides valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms behind sleep regulation and the diverse functions of Hcrt neurons.
The protein kinase Pkc1 plays a critical role in the assembly of chromatin following DNA replication in S. cerevisiae by coordinating the deposition of two important histone modifications, H3 acetylation at K56 and phosphorylation at T45. Pkc1 promotes H3K56 acetylation by phosphorylating the histone acetyl transferase Rtt109, and enhances H3T45 phosphorylation, which is required for H3K56 acetylation. Pkc1 is also necessary for protecting cells from replicative stress, and its kinase activity is required to protect cells from hydroxyurea treatment. The loss of Pkc1 activity results in reduced levels of both H3K56 acetylation and H3K9 acetylation, suggesting that Pkc1 may target the acetyltransferase Rtt109 through phosphorylation of T46.
Seizures can cause severe and prolonged hypoxia (oxygen deprivation) in the brain, which leads to postictal memory and behavioral impairments. The severity and duration of the hypoxia are found to vary based on the duration of the seizure. The use of inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2 or L-type calcium channels helps to attenuate this effect. It is shown that the occurrence of postictal hypoxia results in a separate set of neurological consequences that are currently not being treated and are preventable.
The cerebellum is a key site for understanding plasticity and motor learning in the brain. Researchers monitored the expression of plasticity in the simple-spike firing of cerebellar Purkinje cells during short-term learning in monkeys' smooth pursuit eye movements. They found that a single complex-spike response causes short-term plasticity in a Purkinje cell's mossy fiber/parallel-fiber input pathways. They also found that simple-spike firing rate at the time of an instruction for learning modulates the probability of a complex-spike response. These mechanisms may participate in long-term motor learning.
Crocodiles, the only ectothermic vertebrates with a full ventricular septum, have evolutionarily developed a functional atrioventricular bundle. However, the ventricular Purkinje network, which is responsible for high heart rates and endothermy in mammals and birds, is absent. The study indicates that the evolution of the atrioventricular bundle followed full ventricular septum formation prior to the development of high heart rates and endothermy. The presence of a ventricular septum, rather than high heart rates, resulted in the development of a specialized atrioventricular conduction pathway. The study used RNA-sequencing and in situ hybridization to identify gene markers for mammalian and chicken atrioventricular bundle and its branches and showed the presence of a functional atrioventricular bundle in the alligator septum crest. The study proposes that there are two functional layers, a trabecular myocardial layer and a compact layer, present in crocodiles, which are activated in subsequent order, and may explain the slow ventricular conduction.
A study has been conducted on the within-host genetic diversity of SARS-CoV-2 samples, with the aim of identifying close contacts and reconstructing transmission chains. The study analysed 1181 samples, with 95.1% of samples showing within-host mutations at detectable allele frequencies. The mutational spectra revealed strong strand asymmetries, suggesting damage or RNA editing of the plus strand, rather than replication errors, dominated the accumulation of mutations during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Within- and between-host diversity showed strong purifying selection, particularly against nonsense mutations. While allele frequencies suggest that most samples resulted from infection by a single lineage, multiple putative examples of co-infection were identified. However, mutational hotspots and rare cases of superinfection can confound these analyses. The study sheds light on the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 and could inform efforts to reconstruct transmission chains with genomic data.
The study investigates the role of Rho-associated kinases 1 and 2 (ROCK1/2) in cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. The researchers found that the loss of both ROCK1 and ROCK2 leads to cell-cycle arrest and cellular senescence due to down-regulation of the essential cell-cycle proteins CyclinA, CKS1, and CDK1. However, the loss of either Rock1 or Rock2 did not have a negative impact on tumorigenesis in mouse models of non-small cell lung cancer and melanoma. The study shows that ROCK1 and 2 act redundantly to maintain actomyosin contractility and cell proliferation, likely through the maintenance of cellular contractility. The study reveals the essential role of ROCK in cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis.
Pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma (PASC) is a rare, aggressive cancer with poor patient prognosis. A recent study reported high-frequency somatic mutations affecting UPF1, a factor involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), in PASC. Subsequent studies, however, did not observe these mutations, and controversy has ensued as to whether UPF1 mutations are important drivers of PASC. To investigate this, researchers modeled UPF1 mutations in human and mouse cells and found no significant effects on pancreatic cancer growth, UPF1 splicing, UPF1 protein, or NMD efficiency. They also discovered that 45% of reported UPF1 mutations in PASC patients correspond to standing genetic variants, suggesting they may not be pathogenic. These findings suggest that UPF1 does not play a common functional role in PASC, and further research on the genetic origins of this malignancy is needed.
Researchers have identified the zinc finger protein Zfp106 as a specific GGGGCC RNA repeat-binding protein, which interacts with multiple RNA binding proteins associated with ALS, including TDP-43 and FUS. Zfp106 is found in the nucleolus and discrete nuclear puncta, and mice lacking Zfp106 function show severe motor neuron degeneration. The scientists were able to suppress the neurodegenerative phenotype in these mice by restoring Zfp106 expression specifically in motor neurons, and they also show that Zfp106 potently suppresses neurotoxicity in a Drosophila model of C9orf72 ALS. The research has important implications for the most common form of human ALS.
Proteins range in abundance from a few to millions of copies per cell, and Trypanosoma brucei is an excellent model to study codon bias and differential gene expression. Codon usage is found to be a key factor affecting global relative mRNA and protein expression in trypanosomatids, and relative abundance can be effectively estimated using only protein coding sequences. GC3 codons have a positive impact on both mRNA and protein abundance in trypanosomatids. The study finds that codon usage has the potential to account for the full dynamic range of protein expression levels observed in trypanosomes.
Researchers have found that a chemical present in our bodies works to thwart malaria infection by making parasites toxic to the mosquitoes that spread malaria. A building block of heme, ALA, used by the human body to build the blood protein, activates a metabolic process in the parasite. The study authors found vestigial enzymes in the cytoplasm of Plasmodium-infected red blood cells contribute to ALA-stimulated heme biosynthesis, and initial experiments shows there are no known strains of malaria that are resistant to the ALA process.
The article discusses the role of mutations in altering the conformational preference of transporters, specifically in the small multidrug resistance (SMR) family found in bacteria and archaea. The study focuses on EmrE, a native E.coli transporter composed of an asymmetric and antiparallel homodimer, and how a single conservative mutation introduced into one subunit can influence the conformational equilibrium between inward-open and outward-open states, which ultimately affects its functional output. The experiments used NMR spectroscopy to show that the L51I/wild-type heterodimer induced a shift in the conformational equilibrium in different states of the transport cycle, including conditions where the essential anionic residue Glu14 was protonated or deprotonated and bound to drugs. The authors suggest that these findings have implications for the duplication-divergence evolutionary theory that governs the creation of larger membrane proteins from smaller genes.
The bHLH transcription factor Hand2 plays a critical role in defining the boundaries of the intermediate mesoderm (IM), the tissue from which kidney progenitor cells originate. Hand2 represses IM formation to establish its lateral boundary while promoting venous progenitor formation within the neighboring mesoderm. Hand2 functions in opposition to osr1, another gene required for IM development, to balance the formation of kidney and vein progenitors. Hand2 is necessary to constrain the size of the pronephron, likely through an ability to repress pronephron formation.
Researchers have identified a new mechanism for the slow elongation of membrane proteins during translation in bacteria without the ubiquitous signal recognition particle (SRP)-Alu domain seen in eukaryotes. The researchers suggest that a programmed elongation pause is triggered by Shine-Dalgarno-like elements in the coding sequence, helping to control the translation speed during the process of membrane protein targeting. The rate of translation elongation varies between different codons of the same gene, with some codons translated slower than others. This modulation of the elongation rate helps folding and function of membrane proteins, by slowing down the process in the eubacterial world which lacks SRP-Alu mediated arrest.
The extracellular matrix of Fibronectin plays an important role in the development of the vertebrate nervous system. It serves as an adhesive, connecting the neural tube to the paraxial mesoderm. A study on zebrafish shows that the interface between the neural tube and paraxial mesoderm functions like an engineered adhesive lap joint with rounded edges and a graded Fibronectin adhesive. Fibronectin also remodels to the lateral edges of the neural tube-paraxial mesoderm interface where shear stress is highest. This remodeling is sensitive to variation in morphogenesis and is required for bilaterally symmetric morphogenesis of the paraxial mesoderm. However, it predisposes the neural tube to convergence defects that lead to spina bifida. Loss of inter-tissue adhesion can lead to local tissue detachments and an abrogation of bilaterally symmetric morphogenesis.
Researchers have developed the first ever high-resolution environmental risk maps for leishmaniasis, a neglected tropical disease, which will help to direct future surveillance activities, identify areas to target for disease control and inform future burden estimation efforts. Leishmaniasis is a group of protozoan diseases transmitted to animals and humans by phlebotomine sandflies. The diseases have a broad global distribution across much of the Americas, Africa, and Asia posing a significant public health burden. The research compiled a database of records of cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis occurrences from a variety of sources, which were then used in a boosted regression tree modelling framework along with biologically relevant environmental covariates, to generate global environmental risk maps for the disease.
This article discusses the mechanisms underlying the specificity and robustness of calcium signaling within plant guard cells, which regulate stomatal pores for gas exchange. The study investigates the role of calcium-dependent protein kinases (CPKs) and protein phosphatase 2Cs (PP2Cs) in the activation of S-type anion channels during stomatal closure. The results show that CPK quadruple loss of function mutants are impaired in stomatal closing and show ABA and Ca2+-insensitivity. It is suggested that PP2Cs rapidly deactivate both of the Ca2+-dependent and Ca2+-independent branches by directly dephosphorylating the protein kinase target SLAC1. The findings reveal a previously unknown interdependence of Ca2+-dependent and Ca2+-independent ABA-signaling branches and highlight the importance of ABA-triggered enhancement of Ca2+ sensitivity in guard cells.
The document explains the importance of the Aux/IAA and ARF transcription factors in regulating gene expression within plants, specifically in response to the key hormone auxin. The study explores the effects of a complete loss of Aux/IAA-based transcriptional repression, using a Physcomitrella patens (moss) line that lacks all three IAA genes. The mutant displays a constitutive auxin response and undergoes significant developmental changes, displaying a highly variable phenotype. The study reveals that the Aux/IAAs are essential for auxin regulation of transcription, controlling the induction of gene expression and establishing gene regulatory networks in moss. The study also explores the effects of repressing ARFs on gene expression and how these repressing ARFs work in unison with the Aux/IAA and activating ARFs. The study establishes P. patens as a valuable model for future studies of auxin signaling.
The primary cilium, a non-motile microtubule-based organelle, is essential for signaling and defects in it have been associated with various human diseases. The activity of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), an E3 that regulates the onset of anaphase, is shown to destabilize axonemal microtubules in the primary cilium, and is specifically recruited to the basal body of primary cilia via its metaphase APC co-activator, Cdc20. The extension and resorption of primary cilia is regulated by balancing the bidirectional transport of microtubule subunits and associated protein complexes through intraflagellar transport. The APC also regulates the stability of axonemal microtubules through targeting Nek1, a ciliary kinase, for proteolysis. APC-Cdc20 negatively regulates the length and stability of primary cilia and is required for timely resorption of the cilium after serum stimulation. Dysfunctions of the primary cilium cause a set of human diseases, classified as ciliopathies, such as polycystic kidney diseases.
The study examined how human tactile afferents respond to slip events and surface deformations during dexterous object manipulation. The researchers used microneurography to record the activity of single tactile afferents while monitoring skin deformation at the contact. They found that fast-adapting type I (FA-I) afferents in the fingerpads are well suited to detect incipient slips and provide essential information for the control of grip force during manipulation. The study also explored how friction information might be encoded by tactile afferents and how they respond to surface strains. They found that all tactile afferents in the fingertip responded to slip events, but that FA-I afferents in particular faithfully signaled local skin compressions related to the progression of slips, which can provide information to adjust fingertip forces to different levels of friction.
The RecJ protein is crucial for processing DNA double-strand breaks in the RecF pathway of recombinational DNA repair. Researchers have analyzed the crystal structures of Deinococcus radiodurans RecJ with the deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP), ssDNA, and the C-terminal region of SSB-Ct to gain insight into how the RecF pathway functions. The team found that RecJ has a terminal 5´-phosphate-binding pocket above the active site, a helical gateway at the entrance to the active site that only admits ssDNA, and continuous stacking interactions between protein and nine nucleotides to ensure processive end resection. The N-terminal domain of RecJ contains two divalent cations that coordinate the nucleophilic water, and the ssDNA makes a 180° turn at the scissile phosphate. The findings show how RecJ and SSB work together to efficiently process broken DNA ends for homologous recombination.
Plants use internal signals and associated signaling networks to control metabolism and development in response to constantly changing environmental factors if herbivory, pathogen attacks, and weather fluctuations. To ensure fast repartitioning of resources between development and defense, plants use numerous internal and external signals, including detecting defense metabolites, to optimize fitness. Glucosinolate (GSL) is an important class of plant defense metabolites, and the study found that aliphatic 3-hydroxypropylglucosinolate (3OHPGSL) has novel signaling properties specific to one distinct GSL across plants and fungi. This defense metabolite, or derived compounds, reversibly inhibits root growth and development via genes in the ancient TOR pathway. The study suggests that other evolutionarily new plant metabolites may link to ancient signaling pathways for growth and development.
The function and maintenance of the differentiation niche in Drosophila ovary stem cells is regulated by the cellular redox state, specifically by autocrine Wnt signaling. Defective Wnt signaling disrupts germ cell differentiation and upregulates BMP signaling in differentiated germ cell progeny. The study shows that Wnt signaling is required to maintain the differentiation niche and control gene expression in inner germarial sheath cells. The findings also suggest that physical interactions and signaling-mediated communications between ISC cellular processes and GSC progeny contribute to GSC progeny differentiation.
This study looks at the process of ERAD, the degradation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum that are misfolded, and how both ubiquitin ligases and deubiquitinases can promote ERAD. The study focuses on the E3 ubiquitin ligase gp78 and the deubiquitinase USP13, and how they work together to promote ERAD. The study found that gp78 can ubiquitinate not only ERAD substrates but also the machinery protein Ubl4A, which is a key component of the Bag6 chaperone complex. The study shows that USP13 eliminates ubiquitin conjugates from Ubl4A to maintain the function of Bag6. This study provides new insights into how E3 ubiquitin ligases and deubiquitinases can cooperate to promote ERAD.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease in which pancreatic β cells responsible for insulin production are targeted and destroyed by the immune system. Recent research indicates that viral infections, particularly coxsackievirus (CVB), can contribute to triggering autoimmunity. The study described in this document explores the genetic responses of human pancreatic islet cells to cytokine-treatment and viral infections, revealing that both treatments lead to similar up-regulation of genes and gene networks involved in immune responses. Additionally, the study shows that rat pancreatic α cells are better able than β cells to mount an antiviral response, including higher basal and induced expression of genes regulated by STAT1. These differences may explain why pancreatic β cells but not α cells are targeted by the autoimmune response during T1D. The study raises questions about the role of cellular self-defense programs in determining the outbreak of insulitis and progression to T1D in the face of viral infection or other stimuli, and provides a basis for further research investigating cell-specific responses to viral infection.
Researchers have identified a novel cyclic nucleotide-gated K+ channel (CNGK) family member in sperm of freshwater fish Danio rerio, which helps control sperm navigation. Despite Ca2+ signalling being extensively studied in sperm of marine invertebrates and mammals, little was previously known about it in fish. The researchers discovered that the DrCNGK channel is located in the sperm head, with pH controlling its activity rather than cyclic nucleotides. Alkalization hyperpolarizes sperm and produces Ca2+ entry, which triggers "spinning-like" swimming, guiding the sperm into the micropyle on the surface of fish eggs. The findings show that sperm signaling between species exhibits unique variations which likely reflect adaptations to vastly different ionic milieus and fertilization habits.
Researchers have identified a cellular signalling pathway called mechanoelectrical transduction that converts physical stimuli into electrical signals. Using a proteomic-based strategy, they identified a molecule called Elkin1, which is required for mechanically activated ion channel activity in melanoma cells. The researchers found that Elkin1 supports a PIEZO1-independent mechanoelectrical transduction pathway and modulates cellular adhesions, regulating melanoma cell migration and cell-cell interactions. They also found that melanoma cells exhibit mechanosensitivity, which contributes to tumourigenicity and invasiveness. The study suggests that identifying additional mechanosensitive molecules, such as Elkin1, represents an important outstanding challenge in the field.
The study found that in mice, sleep deprivation and waking periods contribute to daily rhythms in the expression of the Per2 gene, which is involved in circadian rhythms. The study used bioluminescence to measure the expression of the Per2 gene in peripheral tissues and found that it increases during periods of waking and decreases during sleep. Mathematical modeling revealed that Per2 dynamics are driven by both sleep-wake-dependent and circadian forces. The study also found that transitions from sleep to wake and wake to sleep are associated with changes in Per2 expression. The study provides evidence that the sleep-wake distribution is an important contributor to daily changes in Per2 expression, and that the Per2 gene circuitry integrates sleep-wake information and contributes to behavioral adaptability to respond to homeostatic requirements.
The time course of transmitter release at inhibitory basket cell-Purkinje cell synapses is independent of extracellular calcium concentration, despite the fact that release is highly calcium-dependent. Tight coupling between calcium channels and release sensors provides a mechanistic explanation for this apparent independence. The study examined the [Ca2+]o dependence of transmitter release at GABAergic synapses in mouse brain slices, and found that release at this synapse was highly cooperative. The time course of release was found to be largely [Ca2+]o-independent, and the underlying mechanisms were found to be tightly coupled.
Chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress results in toxicity that contributes to multiple human disorders. A stress resolution pathway, initiated by the nuclear receptor LRH-1, that is independent of known unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways has been discovered. This pathway induces expression of the kinase Plk3, which phosphorylates and activates the transcription factor ATF2. LRH-1 agonist treatment increases ER stress resistance and decreases cell death. LRH-1 initiates a novel pathway of ER stress resolution that is independent of the UPR, and targeting LRH-1 may be beneficial in human disorders associated with chronic ER stress. It was found that metabolic diseases such as type II diabetes and fatty liver disease are associated with chronic ER stress, but can be alleviated by activation of LRH-1, therefore medications that target the LRH-1 pathway may alleviate these conditions as well.
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a protein complex that regulates inflammation in the body, and is associated with non-communicable diseases. While the mechanisms of NLRP3 activation are not well understood, chloride channels have been suggested as an important factor. In this study, the essential role of volume-regulated anion channels (VRAC) in activating the NLRP3 inflammasome was established using chemical, biochemical, and genetic approaches. Specifically, LRRC8A, an essential component of VRAC, was identified as a vital regulator of hypotonicity-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation. While some of the compounds that inhibit VRAC were found to be effective in blocking IL-1beta release after treatment with nigericin (a potassium ionophore), they failed to block activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in response to imiquimod. These results suggest that Cl- channel inhibiting compounds exclusively target the K+-dependent canonical pathway of NLRP3 activation. Finally, using the macrophage-specific LRRC8A knockout mouse, the essential role of VRAC in NLRP3 inflammasome activation was confirmed.
In an effort to understand the evolution of animal multicellularity, researchers studied the response of the colony-forming choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta to oxygen gradients. They found that the choanoflagellates displayed positive aerotaxis – oxygen-dependent migration. They also discovered that the choanoflagellates employ a stochastic reorientation search strategy, and that the sensing of oxygen concentration gradients is logarithmic. The findings provide insight into the evolution of animal life and suggest that choanoflagellates may be a useful model organism for understanding the emergence of complex multicellular life.
The causes of variability in the number, length and position of Copy Number Alterations (CNAs) in cancer patients are not yet known. However, CNA number and length are related to patient survival, which suggests clinical importance. Researchers have identified a set of genes that tend to be mutated in samples that have few or many CNAs, known as CONIM genes (COpy Number Instability Modulators), which cluster into a densely connected subnetwork of physical interactions. They found that the presence of heterochromatin in the tissue-of-origin contributes to the recurrence and length of CNAs in the corresponding cancer type. CONIM genes have been found to be associated with significantly different CNA numbers, and are enriched in epigenetic modifiers and DNA repair genes. Mutations in CONIM genes have a higher functional impact score than those in genes not associated with a change in CNA number. The functions, pathways, and complexes enriched among CONIM genes are related to structural changes in the genome, chromosome organization, histone modification, DNA damage, and complex formation. CONIM genes have been found to affect the diversity of CNAs in cancer patients, and may be promising targets for therapeutic intervention.
Ribosome assembly is a complex process involving a number of factors. A study has employed quantitative mass spectrometry/electron microscopy hybrid approach to determine the r-protein composition and conformation of 30S ribosome assembly intermediates in Escherichia coli. The relative timing of assembly of the 3′ domain and the formation of the central pseudoknot ( PK ) structure depends on the presence of the assembly factor RimP. The central PK is unstable in the absence of RimP, resulting in the accumulation of intermediates in which the 3′-domain is unanchored and the 5′-domain is depleted for r-proteins S5 and S12 that contact the central PK. Together, the data suggest that central PK formation can occur either before or after head domain formation. Furthermore, the data implicate RimP in efficient central PK formation and in the subsequent incorporation of tertiary r-proteins S2, S3, S5, S12 and S21.
Researchers have identified the mechanisms by which different types of hepatitis A virus (HAV) virions enter liver cells, according to a study in PLOS Pathogens. While both eHAV and HAV enter via clathrin- and dynamin-dependent endocytosis, the naked HAV virus uncoats in late endosomes, unlike the quasi-enveloped eHAV. The latter undergoes ALIX-dependent trafficking to lysosomes, where quasi-envelope degradation and uncoating happens while breaking through endolysosomal membranes. The study also identified integrin β1 as a key factor in the endocytosis of both types of virions.
The study examines the possibility that functional connectivity in the brain can reflect short-term changes in synaptic efficacy. The researchers demonstrate that repetitive paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) between the ventral premotor cortex (PMv) and primary motor cortex (M1) strengthens the interregional connectivity between the two areas, leading to an increased functional connectivity between them as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The research suggests that changes in functional connectivity might be influenced not only by the underlying skeleton of structural connections but also by modifications in short-term synaptic efficacy. The study also investigates the wider network of areas affected by changes in functional connectivity between PMv and M1.

A new annotation-free computational method, called the Junction Usage Model (JUM), has been used to identify and compare alternative pre-mRNA splicing (AS) pathways in specific groups of Drosophila circadian neurons, revealing that these pathways are important for regulation of the circadian clock. The results show that many novel pre-mRNA isoforms are preferentially expressed in one class of clock neuron and absent from a standard Drosophila head RNA preparation, indicating massive AS regulation in the brain that is key to circadian regulation. The findings also highlight the idea that post-transcriptional processes, such as AS, can impact cell type specification, diversity and function in the brain. The study also reveals the identification of thousands of previously unannotated pre-mRNA isoforms, including splicing events specific to a particular neuronal group, which may specify cell-type-specific protein isoforms resulting in functional differences between neurons.
The AAA+ family ATPase TRIP13 is a regulator of meiotic recombination and the spindle assembly checkpoint, acting on signaling proteins of the conserved HORMA domain family. The structure of the Caenorhabditis elegans TRIP13 ortholog PCH-2 reveals a new family of AAA+ ATPase protein remodelers. TRIP13, aided by the adapter protein p31 (comet), converts the HORMA-family spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 from a signaling-active 'closed' conformer to an inactive 'open' conformer. HORMA domain protein complexes participate in multiple cellular signaling pathways, including meiotic recombination control, DNA repair and the spindle assembly checkpoint. In meiosis, homologous chromosomes must recognize one another and recombine, forming physical links called crossovers (COs) that enable their bi-orientation and segregation in meiosis I. CO formation is promoted and regulated by a conserved family of HORMA domain proteins termed HORMADs. The removal of HORMADs depends on a conserved AAA+ family ATPase, Pch2/TRIP13, that mediates HORMAD removal from chromosomes through specific recognition and disassembly of chromosome-associated HORMAD complexes. Pch2/TRIP13 is directly implicated in the regulation of HORMA domain-mediated signaling in two separate pathways: meiotic recombination and the SAC. Pch2/TRIP13 comprises a new family of AAA+ ATPase protein remodelers, with a substrate-recognition domain similar to the NSF/p97/PEX1 remodeler family and a physical mechanism closely related to the bacterial ClpX unfoldase.
Ticks cannot synthesize their own haem and require an exogenous source of haemoglobin for successful reproduction, though they do not acquire bioavailable iron from digested haemoglobin. This dependence on exogenous haemoglobin for reproduction makes the ticks vulnerable to anti-tick interventions that target haem and iron metabolism. Ticks also lack the gene encoding haem oxygenase, which catalyzes haem catabolism, indicating that they obtain iron from sources other than haem. Through genome-wide analysis and in vitro experiments, it was found that ticks possess only the last three mitochondrial enzymes of the haem biosynthetic pathway, suggesting that the tick's unique maintenance of systemic and
Researchers have identified ACNQ, a molecule used by some anaerobic bacteria as an electron shuttle between the bacteria and insoluble acceptors. ACNQ is derived from DHNA, a non-enzymatic process that has previously frustrated genetic approaches to identify the shuttle. The researchers confirmed that ACNQ contributes to extracellular electron transfer (EET) as an electron shuttle and has implications for bio-energy development. The study also revealed the biosynthesis of ACNQ and its ability to transfer electrons from MR-1 to carbon felt anodes, supporting its role as an electron shuttle.
Changes in the female reproductive system have led to the diversification of pregnancy in placental mammals. Gene expression changes in the human endometrium during pregnancy are associated with the evolution of human-specific pregnancy traits and pathologies. The study identified genes that may contribute to human-specific maternal-fetal communication, immunotolerance, vascular remodeling and deep placental invasion. Such studies can also contribute to the development of diagnostics and interventions for adverse pregnancy outcomes. The study found that genes recruited into endometrial expression in the human lineage are enriched in specific cell types at the maternal-fetal interface, including perivascular endometrial mesenchymal stem cells and four populations of decidual stromal cells, plasmocytes, endothelial cells, dendritic cells, and extravillus cytotrophoblasts.
Researchers have discovered the critical role of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release in amplifying NMDA receptor-driven Ca2+ signals at rest for the maintenance of synaptic homeostasis. This study visualised action potential-independent Ca2+ transients in dendritic regions adjacent to fluorescently labeled presynaptic boutons in physiological levels of extracellular Mg2+. These Ca2+ transients required NMDA receptor activity, but were insensitive to blockers of AMPA receptors, L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels or group I mGluRs. In addition, the researchers found that direct suppression of these resting Ca2+ signals was sufficient to elicit eEF2 kinase dependent postsynaptic scaling.
The article discusses the use of technological advances to analyze gene expression in human myeloid leukemia cells during different stages of the cell cycle. This study used centrifugal elutriation combined with mass spectrometry-based proteomics and RNA-Seq to analyze protein and mRNA expression levels without artificial synchronization procedures. The data set collected is one of the deepest surveys available to date of gene expression in human cells and is presented in an online, searchable database. The study found that protein and mRNA expression levels have complex, gene-specific patterns and may not always be uniform. The article highlights the challenges and technical obstacles involved in the analysis of cell cycle-dependent regulation of gene expression.
Researchers have discovered a way to induce the formation of new hair follicles (HF) in adult, unwounded mouse skin, with implications for creating replacement skin with hair in humans. The study found that activation of Hedgehog signaling in both epithelial and stromal cells induced new HFs that recapitulated embryonic HF development, and mature follicles produced hair co-existing with epithelial tumors. Previous methods of inducing de novo HF, or new HF formation, have only been successful in wounded skin in rabbits, mice, and humans, or through forced epithelial Wnt/β-catenin signaling in mice. The study provides a new way to achieve HF formation in adult skin and suggests that cell-type-specific modulation of a single pathway is sufficient to reactivate embryonic programs in adult tissues, thus inducing complex epithelial structures even without wounding.
The study examines how organisms with unassigned codons in their genetic codes can resolve translation at these codons and how this can impact horizontal gene transfer. The researchers use a genomically recoded Escherichia coli with an unassigned UAG codon to demonstrate that translation at unassigned codons can be resolved through near-cognate suppression, frameshifting, and ribosomal rescue mechanisms. They show that the primary rescue mechanism is the tmRNA system, with deletion of tmRNA restoring expression of UAG-ending genes and enabling propagation of UAG-containing plasmids and viruses in the recoded strain. The study provides insight into how alternative genetic codes can act as barriers to horizontal gene transfer and demonstrates genomic recoding as a strategy to obstruct HGT in engineered organisms.
Salt taste coding is generally considered to be simple, with low-threshold sodium-specific taste receptor cells mediating attraction and ion non-specific cells driving avoidance. However, recent research on Drosophila reveals a more complex model. The labellum of the fly contains five discrete sensory neuron classes, and all of them respond to salt in a dose-dependent manner. Two of these classes are low salt cells while two are high salt cells. The final cell type, Ppk23, responds to salt in an ion non-selective manner and is thought to be involved in internal state-dependent modulation of salt consumption. The research shows that the combinatorial excitation and inhibition of various taste pathways mediates the behavioral valence of salt, with one pathway conferring the ability to specifically modulate salt consumption based on internal state.
Researchers have developed a formalism to characterize the different cell processes involved in tissue growth and morphogenesis, taking into account factors such as cell divisions, rearrangements, apoptosis, and cell size and shape changes. The formalism allows for the quantification of each process separately and has been validated through computer simulations. The researchers have used this formalism to analyze tissue development in Drosophila and found that while cell shape changes, rearrangements, and divisions all play a role in morphogenesis, their relative contributions vary greatly in space and time. The formalism also allows for the analysis of the impact of cell division on other processes, such as cell shape changes and tissue morphogenesis, and can be combined with mechanical stress measurements to reveal unexpected interplays between tissue elongation, cell division, and stress. The researchers suggest that their formalism could provide a new approach to uncover mechanisms governing tissue development.
Researchers have found evidence that microglia - the resident macrophages in the central nervous system - contribute to the pathogenesis of Rett Syndrome in mice. Rett Syndrome is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder that causes developmental stagnation and regression in neurological function. The study found that microglia excessively engulf presynaptic inputs at the end stages of the disease, leading to synapse loss. However, the researchers also found that loss or gain of Mecp2 expression specifically in microglia had little effect on excessive engulfment, synapse loss, or phenotypic abnormalities. The research suggests that microglia contribute to end stages of the disease by dismantling neural circuits rendered vulnerable by loss of Mecp2 in other CNS cell types.
The article discusses how cells repair plasma membrane wounds, particularly in muscle fibers, which are more susceptible to injury, and how defective resealing of the sarcolemma (muscle cell membrane) can lead to muscular dystrophy. The study found that muscle fibers and other cells repair plasma membrane wounds by using a mechanism involving lysosome exocytosis triggered by calcium influx, leading to the release of acid sphingomyelinase, which promotes endocytosis and lesion removal through caveolar endocytosis. The study also found that caveolae accumulate in dystrophic muscle fibers and mutations in caveolin and cavin proteins can cause muscle pathology. The results provide a mechanistic explanation for muscle pathology associated with mutations in caveolae proteins. The study involved the use of transmission electron microscopy, flow cytometry, and other methods.
Researchers have discovered a unique Y chromosome gene called Guy1 in the Anopheles stephensi mosquito that is responsible for causing lethality in female embryos. Researchers found that the small protein produced by this gene causes female lethality and that males carrying the transgene are more competitive than their non-transgenic siblings under laboratory conditions. The GUY1 protein affects embryonic development in a sex-specific manner to dictate sex for the mosquito. The discovery could lead to methods for reducing mosquito populations and disease transmission.
The document discusses the potential use of intermittent parathyroid hormone (iPTH) as a treatment for osteoarthritis, a prevalent degenerative joint disorder that causes joint pain and disability. Available treatments have failed to effectively decrease joint pain or modify the progression of osteoarthritis. The study shows that iPTH can attenuate osteoarthritis pain by inhibiting subchondral sensory innervation, subchondral bone deterioration, and articular cartilage degeneration in a mouse model. The findings suggest that iPTH could be a potential disease-modifying therapy for osteoarthritis. The study found that the sources and mechanisms of osteoarthritis pain may be multifactorial and that subchondral bone is a major source of osteoarthritis pain. Intriguingly, subchondral bone marrow edema-like lesions are highly correlated with osteoarthritis pain. The document explains that PTH, a U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved anabolic agent for osteoporosis, regulates bone remodeling and calcium metabolism. The study investigated whether iPTH could attenuate osteoarthritis pain by modifying cartilage degeneration, subchondral bone microarchitecture, and subchondral sensory innervation. The findings suggest that iPTH reduces osteoarthritis pain and attenuates progression of osteoarthritis by attenuating subchondral bone and cartilage degeneration. Furthermore, iPTH reduces sensory innervation and the level of prostaglandin E2 in the subchondral bone and improves subchondral bone remodeling specifically through PTH type 1 receptor on Nestin+ mesenchymal stromal cells. The document concludes that iPTH reduces osteoarthritis pain by specific inhibition of sensory nerve innervation in subchondral bone.
The obligate intracellular bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis is dependent on nutrient acquisition and susceptible to nutrient limitation strategies associated with the host immune response. During infection, pathogens are starved of essential nutrients such as iron and tryptophan by host immune effectors. In response to starvation of either nutrient, the pathogen enters a physiologically similar 'persistent' state. However, without conserved global stress response regulators, how the Chlamydia trachomatis arrives at this state remains unclear. By delineating their function at the molecular level, we can better target aspects of the host-pathogen interface suitable for therapeutic manipulation. In this document, researchers explore the iron-dependent regulation of the trpRBA tryptophan salvage pathway in Chlamydia trachomatis. They discuss the importance of primary stress responses to pleiotropic insults and co-regulation by stress-responsive transcription factors. The researchers propose a model of iron-dependent transcriptional regulation of trpRBA mediated by the repressor YtgR binding specifically to the intergenic region, which would enable Chlamydia trachomatis to respond similarly to the antimicrobial deprivation of tryptophan or iron mediated by interferon-gamma.
Researchers have found that tinnitus and hyperacusis - the former being a phantom ringing or buzzing sensation, and the latter being normal sounds perceived as intolerably loud or even painful - arise from maladaptive neuroplastic change in the central nervous system (CNS) provoked by cochlear pathology. To explore this, researchers induced both conditions in rats using ototoxic drug salicylate and used a combination of behavioural, electrophysiological and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) techniques to identify the tinnitus-hyperacusis network. The results showed an increase in central gain, which is a form of homeostatic plasticity implicated in tinnitus and hyperacusis. The study concludes that tinnitus and hyperacusis are triggered by peripheral damage, presumably leading to widespread changes in the CNS that involve altered connections in networks that include portions of the central auditory pathway and other regions linked to emotion, memory, attention, and arousal.
CLC proteins can function as either channels or transporters for the ion chloride depending on the presence of a 'glutamate gate', which mediates H+ transport. The structure of the human CLC-1 channel was determined to understand why channels and transporters function differently. The structure revealed a wider pore near the intracellular surface, potentially reducing a kinetic barrier for Cl− conduction. The glutamate gate was not located in a position that could mediate H+ transport, and Cl− at key sites in the pore interacted with reduced affinity compared to transporters. The CLC-1 channel does not transport H+ in a manner tightly coupled to Cl− and it is unclear whether its second intracellular pore is utilized for ion transport.
A new method using adaptive algorithms for the analysis of hyperspectral dark-field images has been developed to study the interactions between tissues and nanoparticles. The technique, which is non-destructive, identifies particles in ex vivo tissue sections, resulting in detailed observations of accumulation patterns arising from organ-specific clearance mechanisms, particle size, and the molecular specificity of nanoparticle surface coatings. The nanoparticles are used for wide-ranging biomedical applications including in vivo imaging, drug delivery, photothermal therapy, and gene transfection. Unlike nanoparticle uptake studies with electron microscopy, this method is tractable for imaging large fields of view. The hyperspectral microscopy with adaptive detection (HSM-AD) method was demonstrated for detecting gold nanorods, gold nanoshells, and silica-coated gold nanospheres in mice.
Research has shown that oncogenic transcriptional events may be driven by plasma membrane misorganization in the progression of epithelial cancers. Scribble (Scrib) module of Drosophila has been used as a model to investigate the mechanisms linking plasma membrane organization to tissue homeostasis. Early evidence from Drosophila has shown that mutations in polarity-regulating genes can cause tumourous growth. The Scrib module and other core polarity regulators are conserved in both vertebrates and invertebrates and research on Drosophila can shed light on the coupling between epithelial architecture and growth control. Loss of a single polarity regulator can cause nuclear misregulation and drive the malignant phenotypes adopted by a neoplastic cell. A coincidence detection mechanism exists that activates a damage-responsive gene expression program when integrity of the epithelia is lost. The JAK/STAT pathway is thought to play a role in the regulation of the Scrib module and involvement by the Polycomb Group (PcG) suggests that PcG attenuation upon polarity loss potentiates select targets for activation by JNK and Yki. Lastly, the role of the tumour-suppressive property of the Scrib module and the effects of loss of polarity are summarized.
The document describes two new genetic tools designed to tag genes in Drosophila, called Double Header (DH) and CRIMIC. Both techniques allow for precise gene manipulation and facilitate detection of gene expression, protein localization, and assessment of protein function. DH significantly increases integration efficiency compared to previous strategies, allowing for the generation of numerous tagged alleles. The CRIMIC approach targets genes lacking coding introns using a two-step cassette exchange. The document also discusses the usefulness of MiMICs, a transposon that integrates a Swappable Integration Cassette (SIC) in the genome, and the development of the Drosophila Gene Disruption Project (GDP), which has generated and mapped 17,500 MiMIC insertion stocks. To expand the ability to tag genes with SICs, the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated HDR approach was developed, which integrates a modified SIC into a coding intron of choice. The document also outlines the development of DH, a compound RMCE cassette that combines two key RMCE cassettes, allowing two valuable reagents to be generated by injecting one MiMIC. The DH construct has successfully been integrated into the genome through P-element mediated transformation, allowing for efficient gene tagging without embryo injections. Finally, the document presents data showing that DH functions as expected, with consistent patterns of expression in third instar larval brains.
Researchers have discovered that there are biophysical gradients in the cerebellar cortex enabling a Fourier-like transformation of mossy fiber inputs, with cerebellar granule cells showing unexpected gradients in their biophysical properties that enable the dispersion of mossy fiber input into its frequency components, similar to a Fourier transformation. By tuning granule cells to different frequencies, the signal-to-noise ratio of input signals can be improved, or only relevant spectral components of a signal can be selected. The findings have significant implications for understanding how the cerebellum controls the timing and precision of movements.
Chromatin boundaries are elements that create independent domains of genetic activity within eukaryotic chromosomes, protecting genes and regulatory elements from interactions with other domains. While it was previously thought that these boundaries were fixed, recent evidence suggests they may be regulated at the tissue and stage level. In this study, a novel developmentally restricted boundary factor, Elba, was discovered, which is involved in centring chromosomal DNA segments in close proximity for proper segmental identity. Elba is an unusual hetero-tripartite protein complex that requires all three of its proteins for DNA binding and insulator activity. The study used probes from pHS1 for EMSA experiments and found that Elba is present in extracts from early 0-6 hr embryos where pHS1 boundary activity is high, but only little Elba is detected in older 6-12 hr embryos where pHS1 boundary activity in vivo is largely absent.
Axon guidance involves a combination of long- and short-range attractive and repulsive cues. Netrin and Frazzled (DCC in vertebrates) is a prototypical pair for chemoattraction, with roles in both long- and short-range guidance. In the Drosophila visual system, R8 photoreceptor growth cones were shown to require Net-Fra to reach their target, the peak of a Net gradient. However, using live imaging, it has been found that R8 growth cones reach and recognize their target without Net, Fra, or Trim9, a partner of Fra. Net and DCC play a critical role in wiring the brain in both vertebrates and invertebrates. In brief, Net expressed at the floor plate is proposed to diffuse to establish a decreasing ventral-to-dorsal gradient within the spinal cord. Classic in vitro studies support a role for Net as a chemoattractant. Net-DCC based axon guidance to the midline is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism in nervous system development.
This document discusses the importance of understanding the molecular genetics of development and function in the vocal apparatus for social interactions among animals, including humans, and its relevance to biomedical research. The document highlights the limited knowledge of the developmental biology of the mammalian larynx and vocal folds, which is crucial for vocal communication in animals. Additionally, the document discusses how voice defects impact patients' quality of life and how they are associated with acute insults, hereditary and chronic conditions, and human birth defect syndromes. The paper characterises laryngeal and vocal fold development in ciliopathic Fuz mutant mice and Gli3 mutant mice, and how excess neural crest is a common etiology underlying diverse Hedgehog-related craniofacial defects. The paper demonstrates how understanding the molecular genetic basis of laryngeal patterning and morphogenesis will inform our understanding of vertebrate animal behaviours involving acoustic communication.
Staphylococcus aureus pathogenicity islands (SaPIs) are mobile genetic elements that carry and disseminate superantigen genes, causing toxic shock syndrome. SaPIs remain passive in the host chromosome until induced by a helper phage, initiating the excision-replication-packaging (ERP) cycle of the islands. It was previously assumed that SaPI de-repression was caused by phage proteins that bind to SaPI-encoded master repressor Stl. However, a recent study reports that the SaPI Stl repressors have evolved to interact with unrelated proteins, encoded by different phages, that perform the same conserved function, allowing for high intra- and inter-generic transference. The study also identifies a new phage-encoded inducer of SaPI cycle, dimeric Dut from phage ϕNM1. This research sheds light on a previously unknown mechanism that enhances the promiscuous transfer of SaPIs by targeting conserved phage mechanisms.
The study examines the impact of mutations on allosteric regulation, wherein protein activity is modulated by a signal outside the active site. The researchers conducted a saturation mutagenesis of a synthetic allosteric switch, and found that fewer than 5% of mutations had a statistically significant influence on allostery. Most allostery disrupting mutations were proximal to the insertion site, while allostery enhancing mutations were distributed across the protein and enriched on the surface. Combining several allostery enhancing mutations yielded near-additive improvements to the dynamic range. The study provides insight into practical strategies for optimizing engineered systems and shows that weakly conserved, structurally distributed surface sites can contribute to allosteric tuning. The researchers suggest that the study's findings can inform both practical and evolutionary aspects of multi-domain regulation in proteins.
Differences in growth and behavior between breeders and nonbreeders in highly cooperative societies have been extensively described, but their molecular underpinnings are not well-known. In this study, the consequences of breeding for skeletal morphology and gene regulation in highly cooperative Damaraland mole-rats were investigated. By experimentally assigning breeding "queen" status versus non-breeder status to age-matched littermates, it was confirmed that queens experience vertebral growth likely to confer advantages to fecundity. However, they also upregulate bone resorption pathways and show reductions in femoral mass, which predicts increased vulnerability to fracture. Together, these results show that reproductive division of labor in mole-rats leads to gene regulatory rewiring and extensive morphological plasticity, but in mole-rats, concentrated reproduction is also accompanied by costs to bone strength.
The molecular mechanisms behind proteins that promote pausing in microtubules are poorly understood. Researchers have found that KIF21B is a processive motor that can accumulate at microtubule plus ends and induce pausing. KIF21B contains a motor-inhibiting domain that enhances its pause-inducing activity, as well as microtubule-binding and regulatory activities that make it a potent regulator of microtubule plus-end dynamics. KIF21B can block microtubule polymerization, causing them to shorten slowly. Another family member of KIF21B, KIF21A, reduces the microtubule growth rate and suppresses catastrophes. KIF21A mutations cause a dominant eye movement syndrome, CFEOM1, where the loss of autoinhibition results in an increased activity of the mutant KIF21A kinesin. KIF21B is also linked to inflammation and neurodevelopmental abnormalities.
Scientists studied the mechanical properties and protein interactions of the concentric shells of multilayered dsRNA viruses, specifically triple, double, and single-layered rotavirus particles. They found that the mechanics of the external layer provided the resistance needed to counteract the strict conditions of extracellular media, while the intermediate layer presented weak hydrophobic interactions with the inner layer and allowed for the assembly and conformational dynamics needed for transcription. Their work shows how the biophysical properties of the three shells are finely tuned to produce an infective RV virion. The study used atomic force microscopy to directly probe the existence of pressure, the stiffness or spring constant, breaking force, brittleness, and mechanical fatigue of individual particles. They found that AFM topographies provided a more realistic view of the RV virion's distribution ranging from fully decorated to almost naked particles. Their experiments, in combination with electrostatic analyses, revealed a strong interaction between the two outer layers and how it is suppressed by the removal of calcium ions, a key step for transcription initiation.
Whipple's disease (WD) is a rare chronic infectious disease caused by Tropheryma whipplei (Tw) that affects multiple organs and can be fatal if left untreated. Although most humans are exposed to Tw, only a minority develops WD (<0.01%), while asymptomatic chronic carriage of Tw is more common (<25%). In a study of a French kindred, containing four WD patients and five healthy Tw chronic carriers, researchers identified a single very rare non-synonymous mutation in the four patients: the private R98W variant of IRF4, a transcription factor involved in immunity. The five Tw carriers were younger, and also heterozygous for R98W. The researchers found that R98W was loss-of-function, modified the transcriptome of heterozygous leukocytes following Tw stimulation and was not dominant-negative, suggesting that AD IRF4 deficiency can underlie WD by haploinsufficiency, with age-dependent incomplete penetrance. The familial segregation of the IRF4 R98W allele was consistent with an AD pattern of WD inheritance with incomplete clinical penetrance. Chronic Tw carriage also followed an AD mode of inheritance.
Researchers have identified a replication checkpoint in budding yeast that inhibits double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) before they occur. The checkpoint acts through three complementary mechanisms: inhibition of Mer2 phosphorylation by Dbf4-dependent Cdc7 kinase, preclusion of chromosomal loading of Rec114 and Mre11, and lowered abundance of the Spo11 nuclease. Without this checkpoint, cells can form DSBs on partially replicated chromosomes, which lead to a rapid loss in cell viability. The replication checkpoint has not been characterized in budding yeast meiosis but works the same way as mitotic checkpoint suppression, inhibiting DDK kinase activity.
This document presents a model for the growth of fibrous tissues based on 3D-electron microscopy of mouse tendon. The study shows that embryonic growth of fibrous tissues primarily occurs by increases in fibril number and length, while postnatal growth occurs mainly from increases in fibril length and diameter. A helical crimp structure is established in embryogenesis and persists postnatally. The data support a model where the shape and size of tendon is determined by the number and position of embryonic fibroblasts. The collagen fibrils synthesized by these cells provide a template for postnatal growth by structure-based matrix expansion. The study has important implications for growth of other fibrous tissues and fibrosis.
The exon junction complex (EJC) is crucial for regulation of Wg/Wnt signaling, a process that is important for cell proliferation, pattern formation, stem cell maintenance, and adult tissue homeostasis. The EJC controls the splicing of dlg1, a cell polarity gene whose coding protein interacts with Dishevelled (Dsh). Dlg1 acts independently to prevent lysosomal degradation of Dsh, therefore allowing Wg/Wnt protein internalization for signaling activation. In addition, human orthologous Dlg protein was found to promote Dvl protein stabilization and Wnt signaling activity, suggesting a conserved regulatory mechanism of Wg/Wnt signaling by Dlg and EJC. The pre-EJC component is critical for Wg signaling activation as it regulates Wg morphogen reception by maintaining an appropriate level of Dsh protein for signal activation. Blocking Wg protein reception at the plasma membrane is believed to cause the Wg signaling defects seen in mutant cells. The pre-EJC acts primarily through Dsh in wing discs to regulate Wg signaling reception.
The neural basis for how recent experience influences decisions in action selection is not well understood. Researchers studied the activity of the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPTg) in mice selecting actions based on sensory cues and recent history, and found that the activity of many PPTg neurons at the time of action selection reflected the action on the previous trial and its outcome, and the strength of this activity predicted the upcoming choice. Inactivating the PPTg decreased the influence of recent experience on action selection. The study suggests that the PPTg provides a mechanism for incorporating recent experience into the computations underlying action selection.
Researchers have discovered that Neuregulin1 (Nrg1) is a potent mitogen for the endogenous adult heart regeneration program in zebrafish, and could hold great potential for addressing human cardiovascular disease. The study found that tcf21+ epicardial derived, perivascular cells were the dominant source of Nrg1 in the postnatal ventricular wall. When Nrg1 expression was reactivated in zebrafish, there was a marked increase in cardiomyocyte proliferation, particularly within the ventricular wall, indicating that Nrg1 is essential for heart regeneration.
Scientists have analysed the genomes of 19 choanoflagellate species to study the key features that defined the biology of the first animal, known as Urmetazoan, which originated over 600 million years ago. Only two choanoflagellate genomes were previously available, leaving the bulk of their diversity unexplored. The scientists found that a further 372 gene families previously thought to be animal-specific evolved before the choanoflagellate-animal divergence, including gene families required for animal development such as Notch, and delta, and immunity related genes such as Toll-like receptors. Gene loss was also noted during animal and choanoflagellate diversification.
The protein tau is associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, and chaperones play a role in preventing tau aggregation into toxic structures. HSPB1, a well-known suppressor of tau aggregation, delays tau fiber formation by weakly interacting with early species in the aggregation reaction. Members of the Hsp40 co-chaperone family, particularly DNAJA2 and DNAJB1, also interfere with the tau aggregation pathway, but little is known about how they interact with tau or modify tau disease-related amyloid states. The study found that DNAJA2 and DNAJB1 chaperones suppress the formation of tau fibrils and interact with tau differently. DNAJA2 recognizes aggregation-prone conformers and even mature fibers, whereas DNAJB1 only interacts with aggregation-prone tau conformers such as seeding competent species or mature fibers. HSPB1 only binds tau monomers. These results highlight the fact that chaperones from different families/classes play distinct yet complementary roles in preventing pathological protein aggregation.
Drosophila Atrophin mutants display defects in neurodegeneration, segmentation, patterning and planar polarity. A new study presents the first genomic analysis of Atrophin, using ChIP-seq against endogenous Atrophin, and identifies 1300 potential direct targets of Atrophin, including engrailed and components of the Dpp and Notch signaling pathways. The study shows that Atrophin regulates Dpp and Notch signaling in larval imaginal discs, at least partially via the regulation of thickveins and fringe. Phenotypic analyses of Trithorax-like (Trl) and Atrophin clones suggest that Atrophin is required to modulate the transcription activation by Trl in larval imaginal discs. The study identifies the genome-wide targets of Atrophin by chromatin-immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) in Drosophila Schneider 2 cells in three biological replicates. The study finds that Atro binds to regulatory regions of engrailed and in the putative regulatory regions of multiple Dpp and Notch signaling components. The study reveals that Atro negatively modulates En expression, while Trl promotes En expression.
This study investigated the subunit architecture of telomerase, an enzyme that extends the life of cells and is important for the maintenance of telomeres (chromosome ends) in human cells. The study used a new approach of subunit labelling for single-molecule imaging to determine the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) content of complexes assembled in cells or cell extract. The study found that human telomerase DNA binding and synthesis properties exist at a single-molecule level and established conserved telomerase subunit architecture from single-celled organisms to humans. The study supports the function of human telomerase as a single-subunit enzyme and demonstrated an evolutionarily conserved telomerase subunit architecture.
Scientists have created a new protein-based calcium indicator called CaRuby-Nano, which fluoresces red, has a high sensitivity to calcium and can detect small calcium influxes. It can also be dual-imaged with eGFP, enabling researchers to monitor multiple processes in a single cell. The protein is expected to be useful to those studying the nervous system, where high signal-to-noise calcium imaging is critical.
Scientists have discovered a neural code for food abundance in the Caenorhabditis elegans worm. Information concerning food availability is commonly encoded using an on/off algorithm, while this research determined that expression of genes daf-7 and tph-1 was specifically binary; daf-7 encoding lifespan variability and tph-1 specifically regulating gene expression responses to food levels. The study has implications for understanding broader physiological responses to food availability including stress resistance, metabolic states, fecundity and lifespan, which can impact health and disease progression.  
A study on the natural variation of vernalization temperature requirement in Arabidopsis thaliana accessions found that vernalization was required at temperatures above 0°C and was still relatively effective at 14°C in all the accessions. The different accessions had characteristic vernalization temperature profiles, with one Northern Swedish accession showing maximum vernalization at 8°C. Field experiments revealed that vernalization occurred in autumn in northern Sweden with plants flowering immediately upon snowmelt. These findings have important implications for understanding the molecular basis of adaptation and for predicting the impact of climate change on flowering time.
A study has used insulin knockout zebrafish to identify insulin-independent modulators of glucose metabolism. The zebrafish were modified using a technique that allowed insulin mutant larvae to be screened for glucose-reducing molecules. Three molecules were identified, including an androgen receptor antagonist, which was shown to have an insulin-independent beneficial role in reducing fasting glucose levels. The use of zebrafish provides a new in vivo model for rapid screening and decoupling of insulin-dependent and independent mechanisms. Restoring normoglycemia without insulin secretion or action could delay progression of diabetes and prevent hyperinsulinemia-driven insulin resistance and obesity.
The study investigates how individual neurons in neural circuits generate divergent connections with multiple postsynaptic partners. The researchers used dyadic synapses in C. elegans as a model and found that nrx-1/neurexin directs divergent connectivity through differential actions at synapses with partnering neurons and muscles. Nrx-1 located at presynaptic sites specifically directs postsynaptic development in GABAergic neurons, which provides evidence that individual neurons can direct differential patterns of connectivity with their post-synaptic partners through partner-specific utilization of synaptic organizers. The study also shows that cholinergic outputs onto neurons are located at previously undefined spine-like protrusions from GABAergic dendrites, and both these spine-like features and cholinergic receptor clustering are strikingly disrupted in the absence of nrx-1. The findings provide a novel view into molecular control of divergent connectivity.
The document discusses how the genetic risk loci for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) affect changes in gut microbiota. The ATG16L1 T300A risk allele, which results in abnormal Paneth cells due to decreased selective autophagy, increased cytokine release, and decreased intracellular bacterial clearance, has been shown to contribute to dysbiosis and immune infiltration prior to disease symptoms. Additionally, different microbial populations have been associated with IBD, including an increase in Bacteroides fragilis, and genetic variants play a role in microbial dysbiosis. Understanding the specific microbial alterations that occur in IBD will be important for identifying disease subtypes and developing precision medicine treatment options. The document also discusses how T300A affects gut microbial composition in mice both during inflammation and at steady state, with alterations observed in the microbiota of T300A mice suggesting increased abundance in specific microbial populations.
The process of dosage compensation ensures that males and females express equal levels of X-chromosome transcripts. The mechanism in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has been elusive due to improperly annotated transcription start sites (TSSs). Researchers identified TSSs and the distribution of transcriptionally engaged RNA polymerase II (Pol II) genome-wide in wild-type and dosage-compensation-defective animals to determine the step of transcription controlled by the dosage compensation complex (DCC). They found that C. elegans equalizes X-chromosome expression between sexes by reducing Pol II recruitment to promoters of hermaphrodite X-linked genes using a chromosome-restructuring condensin complex. The study developed a procedure to map the position, density, and orientation of transcriptionally engaged Pol II genome-wide in C. elegans and provides an invaluable TSS dataset for dissecting C. elegans gene regulation.
Understanding the development of antibodies that mediate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is important for the design of an HIV vaccine that can elicit protective antibodies. Researchers reconstructed the developmental pathways of six human HIV-specific ADCC antibodies using longitudinal antibody sequencing data. It was found that gain of ADCC function typically required mutations in complementarity determining regions of one or both chains. Enhancement of ADCC potency often required additional mutations in framework regions. Antigen binding affinity and ADCC activity were correlated, but affinity alone was not sufficient to predict ADCC potency. The study provides important insights into the specific mutations that drive maturation of ADCC antibody lineages.
Researchers combined neuroimaging, non-invasive cortical stimulation, and computational modeling to examine the interactions between regions of the primate visual system encompassing distinct levels of the visual hierarchy during rest. They found that local inhibition of early visual cortex selectively increased feedforward interactions with FEF and extrastriate visual areas, whereas identical stimulation of the FEF decreased feedback interactions with early visual areas. Computational modelling suggests that these opposing effects reflect a fast-slow timescale hierarchy from sensory to association areas. These findings provide insights into the neural mechanisms that underlie the effects of local inhibition on large-scale brain dynamics, and offer a better understanding of how interactions between areas of the visual system emerge.
The inhibitory signaling in the nervous system is controlled by the transmembrane flux of chloride ions (Cl-) across neuronal membranes. This movement is dependent on the neuronal Cl- driving force, which is regulated by various cellular mechanisms, such as Na+/K+-ATPase, ion conductances, impermeant anions, electrodiffusion, water fluxes, and cation-chloride cotransporters (CCCs). The authors present biophysical models of Cl- homeostasis that demonstrate how impermeant anions and CCCs play different roles in setting Cl- driving force. While impermeant anions can contribute to setting [Cl-]i in neurons, they have no appreciable effect on the driving force for Cl- locally and cell-wide. In contrast, CCCs can selectively regulate significant changes in the Cl- driving force and thus modulate inhibitory signaling in neurons. This model provides a theoretical framework for interpreting recent experimental findings and understanding the interplay of chloride regulatory processes in neurons. The computational model used in this study has provided novel analytic solutions, and it is robust and validated by its convergence to stable fixed points. Hence, computational models based on established biophysical first principles are productive means for investigating the determinants of Cl- driving force.
Salicylate and acetylsalicylic acid are widely used anti-inflammatory drugs that are known to inhibit cyclo-oxygenases and modulate NF-κB activity, but the full extent of their effects is not known. This study found that salicylate inhibits CBP and p300 lysine acetyltransferase activity in vitro by direct competition with acetyl-Coenzyme A at the catalytic site. Another anti-inflammatory drug, diflunisal, was found to inhibit p300 more potently than salicylate. At concentrations attainable in human plasma after oral administration, both drugs blocked the acetylation of lysine residues on histone and non-histone proteins in cells. Diflunisal also suppressed the growth of p300-dependent leukemia cell lines expressing AML1-ETO fusion protein in vitro and in vivo. These results highlight a novel epigenetic regulatory mechanism of action for salicylate and derivative drugs.
Researchers have developed a method to trace the origins of congenital diseases by accurately quantifying the three-dimensional (3D) spatial distribution of gene expression domains in developing organs. The method uses Geometric Morphometrics (GM), a set of statistical tools for measuring and comparing shapes with increased precision and efficiency, to associate the changes in the shape of gene expression patterns in 3D with phenotypic changes. The team used the method to investigate limb malformations in the rare congenital disease Apert syndrome and revealed significant differences that were traced back to as early as one day after the initiation of limb development. The method can be applied to different organ systems and models to investigate the etiology of malformations.
A study conducted by Upton et al. (2015) showed high rates of somatic LINE-1 element retrotransposition in the human hippocampus and cerebral cortex, suggesting its impact on genes important for neuronal function. However, after reanalyzing their data and filtering out thousands of artifacts interpreted as somatic mutations, the mutation frequency was around 0.2 events per cell, 50 times lower than previously reported. The study concludes that L1 elements mobilize in some human neurons, but L1 mosaicism is not ubiquitous. Chimeric DNA molecules were found to falsely link unrelated DNA fragments, creating the appearance of biological LINE mobilization. The study suggests full-length cloning validation for accurate screening of potential false-positive candidate somatic insertions.
The process of nucleosome assembly, which involves the deposition of histones onto DNA, remains unclear. Scientists have discovered that yeast chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF1), a conserved histone chaperone complex that deposits H3-H4 during DNA replication, binds a single H3-H4 heterodimer in solution. CAF1 binds preferentially to DNA molecules longer than 40 base pairs and is required for efficient DNA synthesis-coupled nucleosome assembly. The conservative nature of histone deposition and propagation could be due to the biochemical properties of the histone chaperone machinery that operates at the replication fork. A central, unanswered question is how parental H3-H4 tetramers are propagated and how new H3-H4 tetramers are assembled behind the replication fork.
In this document, the authors describe a novel in vitro assay for the motility of localizing Drosophila mRNA's bound to native dynein-dynactin complexes. The study aimed to address questions about how multi-motor translocation is regulated during cargo sorting using microtubule-based motility. The authors found that RNA localization signals stimulate the processive movements of individual RNPs, indicating a regulation of dynein-dynactin’s activity rather than its total copy number per RNP. This model demonstrates how an RNA population could be anchored at its destination using microtubule-associated proteins and microtubule ends. The study suggests that the mechanisms governing translocation of cargo by teams of microtubule motors need to be further investigated to understand cargo trafficking in vivo.
Researchers have discovered a synthetic molecule that activates the Piezo1 protein, which functions as a biological pressure sensor in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Piezo proteins are necessary and sufficient for mechanically activated cation channel activity, i.e. the conversion of mechanical forces into biological responses. The effect of the molecule, named Yoda1, was tested on mice and humans Piezo1, but not Piezo2, and sensitised them to pressure. Yoda1, which can be studied in artificial lipid bilayers, will assist in the further study of Piezo1 regulation and function.
Scientists have measured the effects on viral growth of all amino acid mutations to two HIV envelope proteins that differ at over 100 residues. They identify sites that have shifted in their amino acid preferences between the two, with the results suggesting that long-range epistasis helps shift Env's mutational tolerance during HIV evolution. Many of the shifts occur at residues that do not touch substitutions. Overall, the work provides a comprehensive understanding of the mutations that affect Env's evolution and function, which is important because Env evolves rapidly and degrades the efficacy of most anti-HIV antibody immunity.
Researchers have found that early lethality, obesity, tremor, altered anxiety-like behaviors, and impaired acoustic startle response in mice missing MeCP2 from glutamatergic neurons are particular to this type of neuron. The study sought to determine the role of excitatory signaling impairment in Rett syndrome (RTT), a postnatal neurological disorder. Most mouse models of RTT display impaired excitatory neurotransmission, yet MeCP2 deficiency in glutamatergic neurons closely reproduces the RTT phenotype. This suggests that RTT and other postnatal neurological disorders could be caused by a disturbance in excitatory/inhibitory homeostasis.
A study has identified genetic variations in gene expression known as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in yeast segregants. Over 70% of variability in mRNA levels was accounted for by the resulting eQTLs. Most genes had multiple eQTLs, with most variation arising from trans-acting eQTLs located far from their target genes. These trans-eQTLs clustered at 102 hotspot locations, some of which influenced the expression of thousands of genes. Hotspot regions were enriched for transcription factor genes. While most genes had a local eQTL, most of these had no detectable effects on the expression of other genes in trans. The individual effect sizes of the trans-eQTLs were smaller than those of local eQTLs, but their aggregate effect was larger.
When cells move or absorb surrounding material, they use a process called actin filament nucleation. This process generates a network of filaments that grow towards the membrane to which they are tethered, potentially restricting their growth. However, experiments found that the WASP protein dissociates from filament-bound Arp2/3 complex prior to the growth of the new filament. While WASP stimulates the pre-nucleation complexes, the growth is triggered by the release of WASP, solving the problem of restricting filament growth against membranes. The coordination of the events occurring during actin branching was resolved by three-color single-molecule fluorescence colocalization methods. The results showed that the activation step in nucleation is likely the release of VCA dimers from the branch, enabling daughter filament growth.
The protein kinase target of rapamycin (TOR) forms two distinct protein complexes called TOR complex 1 (TORC1) and TOR complex 2 (TORC2) that exhibit substrate specificities. Sin1 is a TORC2-specific subunit that is essential for activating certain kinases. Although Sin1 is dispensable for the catalytic activity of TORC2, it binds specifically to the TORC2 substrate kinases through its conserved region in the middle (Sin1CRIM). The specific substrate-recognition function of Sin1CRIM is conserved in humans and may represent a potential target for novel anticancer drugs that prevent activation of the mTORC2 substrates such as AKT. Sin1 is also a stable subunit of fission yeast TORC2 that assembles around Tor1, one of the two TOR kinases in this organism. Sin1CRIM can recruit Gad8 for phosphorylation even in the absence of Sin1 or other TORC2 subunits in fission yeast. The Sin1 subunit is not crucial for the integrity of S. pombe TORC2, and even in the absence of Sin1, the other TORC2 subunits assemble into a complex.
The Escherichia coli single-stranded DNA binding (SSB) protein plays an essential role in genome maintenance by binding tightly to and protecting single-stranded DNA intermediates formed during DNA replication, recombination, and repair. SSB also interacts directly with more than a dozen proteins involved in genome maintenance, regulating their access to single-stranded DNA and bringing them to their sites of action. The protein binds with high affinity and little sequence specificity to single-stranded DNA intermediates and can bind to them in a variety of modes that differ primarily in the number of oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding (OB) folds that interact with the tetramer. In this study, the authors used single-molecule force and fluorescence spectroscopy to investigate E. coli SSB binding to single-stranded DNA. They found that stretching a single SSB-ssDNA complex reveals discrete states that correlate with known binding modes, the likely single-stranded DNA conformations and diffusion dynamics in each, and the kinetic pathways by which the protein wraps single-stranded DNA and is dissociated. The data allow them to construct an energy landscape for the SSB-ssDNA complex, revealing that unwrapping energy costs increase the more single-stranded DNA is unraveled. Their findings provide insights into the mechanism by which proteins gain access to single-stranded DNA bound by SSB.
The RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) play an important role in detecting viral infections and modulating antiviral immunity, but the specific viral RNAs that they interact with have not been fully identified. To investigate this, researchers tagged RLRs and used affinity purification followed by next-generation sequencing to identify the specific regions of viral RNA that bind to different RLRs during infections with measles and chikungunya viruses. The study showed that different regions of the measles genome were recognized by different RLRs, and RIG-I specifically bound to the 3’ untranslated region of the chikungunya genome. The RLRs represent potential targets for antiviral therapies and vaccine development. However, more research is needed to understand the functions and differences between RLRs and how they respond to different viruses.
A study has revealed that a specific gene, known as STAT5B, is the dominant paralog over STAT5A when it comes to CD4+ &lsquo;helper&rsquo; T cells, which are vital to the adaptive immune system. While both these paralogs are similar, the study found that STAT5B is necessary for immunological tolerance and is also more impactful than STAT5A. Furthermore, STAT5B is sometimes unable to compensate for vital functions like humans with germline mutations in STAT5B. It was also found that asymmetric expression, rather than distinct functional properties, determines the dominant STAT5 paralog in lymphoid cells.
The study examines the role of the RcsF/OMP complex in outer membrane (OM) stress response in Gram-negative bacteria. The RcsF/OMP complex is required for sensing LPS structural defects, which cause outer leaflet stress in the OM. The study uses Polymyxin B (PMB) to test the function of the RcsF/OMP complex in sensing LPS perturbations, while Glb is used to prevent maturation of lipoproteins resulting in the accumulation of OM lipoproteins in the outer leaflet of the IM, inducing the Rcs response. The study shows that the RcsF/OMP complex is functional and required for sensing OM outer leaflet stress, which activates the stress response via the RcsF C-terminal signaling domain located in the periplasm. In conclusion, the study provides insights into how Gram-negative bacteria respond to and combat environmental insults, emphasizing the importance of OM integrity and barrier function for survival in these organisms.
New research has uncovered the neural mechanisms behind unconsciousness induced by general anaesthesia. By using a novel combination of positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging, the researchers were able to track metabolic changes in the brain whilst monitoring unconsciousness and recovery levels in patients. During unconsciousness, specific areas of the brain, including the thalamus, the Default Mode Network (DMN) and the bilateral Frontoparietal Networks (FPNs), proved more susceptible to decreased cerebral metabolic rate and cerebral blood flow. However, certain functional networks including cortico-cortical functional connectivity within the DMN and FPNs were preserved. Recovery was associated with sustained reduction in cerebral blood flow and restored DMN thalamo-cortical functional connectivity. The study suggests that loss of thalamo-cortical functional connectivity is sufficient to produce unconsciousness. Understanding the neural mechanisms of unconsciousness is seen as fundamental to unlocking treatment for patients with disorders of consciousness (
This study investigates a previously uncharacterized acetylation of histone H3 at lysine 64 (H3K64ac) and its role in regulating nucleosome stability and facilitating nucleosome eviction, therefore impacting gene expression. The study found that H3K64ac is enriched at the transcriptional start sites of active genes and is anti-correlated with repressive marks such as H3K27me3 and H3K64me3. H3K64ac is also strongly enriched at enhancers and is present in a variety of mouse and human cell lines and tissues, suggesting a rather ubiquitous function. The findings reveal an important role for H3K64ac in the regulation of chromatin function and its potential as a defining mark for transcriptionally active chromatin.
The regulatory landscape used by complex bilaterians was already in place at the dawn of animal multicellularity, according to an analysis of histone modifications in the sponge Amphimedon queenslandica, a morphologically simple, early branching animal. The researchers found that the regulatory foundation for spatiotemporal gene expression evolved prior to the divergence of sponges and eumetazoans, and was necessary for the evolution of animal multicellularity. The study suggests that the regulatory foundation for animal multicellularity evolved before the origin of novel genes.
TFIID, a central component of the Pol II promoter recognition apparatus, is downregulated in terminally differentiated cells such as myocytes, hepatocytes, and adipocytes. TBP protein levels are regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which targets TBP for K48-linked ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation. Huwe1 is an E3 ligase that targets TBP, and USP10 antagonizes the deubiquitinase that protects TBP from degradation. Modulating the levels of both Huwe1 and USP10 fine-tunes the requisite degradation of TBP during myogenesis. TBP is a substrate for ubiquitination, and Huwe1 is the most promising candidate as an E3 ligase targeting TBP.
The central complex is a region in the insect brain that controls various behaviors, and its circuit computations have been explored through various modeling studies. The connectivity between neurons in the central complex has mostly been assumed through light microscopy images. However, this study provides functional connectome for Drosophila melanogaster's central complex at the cell-type resolution as a website for interactive exploration of the results. The study tested the connectivity of 70 presynaptic-to-postsynaptic cell-type pairs by optogenetic stimulation, calcium imaging, and pharmacology. The connectivity of the recurrent circuit seems to be sparsely connected than anticipated from light microscopy images. Additionally, this research has highlighted the potential significance of a class of bottleneck interneurons, and the output channels of the central complex are scarce. The study has some limitations, but it provides an intermediary step towards more sensitive and precise techniques for investigating neural connectivity.
The mechanism of fast neurotransmitter release is still not fully understood, but researchers have used a single vesicle-vesicle system to study the membrane states upon calcium injection. They discovered various pathways for neurotransmitter release, but the immediate pathway was found to be synchronous, and complexin was found to be a key protein in promoting immediate fusion of vesicles. Cryo-electron microscopy was used to observe the membrane morphology before and after calcium injection, which revealed point contacts, hemifusion diaphragms, and other extended close contacts without hemifusion. These interfaces are thought to be part of the slower, delayed fusion pathways.
The kinesin I family of motor proteins are essential for axonal transport and synaptic plasticity, but their roles in dendritic transport and postsynaptic function are not well-defined. This study found that knockdown of KIF5A or KIF5B in hippocampal neurons affects excitatory synapses and dendritic transport differently. KIF5B is involved in dendritic spine morphogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and memory formation, while the function of KIF5A and KIF5C is less clear. This specificity may be due to the diverse carboxyl-termini of the three KIF5s, which may confer individual functions in neurons. Arginine methylation was identified as a novel post-translational modification in regulating cargo binding in KIF5B. This study suggests that the expansion of the kinesin I family during evolution leads to diversification and specialization of motor proteins in regulating postsynaptic function that is important for learning and memory.
Researchers have found that synovial joints, which are the source of arthritis, first evolved much earlier than previously thought. A study of diverse ray-finned fish found that homologs of the critical lubricating protein of mammalian synovial joints, Prg4/Lubricin, are specifically enriched at the jaw and pectoral fin joints of stickleback, gar and zebrafish. Genetic deletion of the zebrafish prg4b gene resulted in the same age-related degeneration of joints seen in lubricin-deficient mice and humans. The findings suggest that synovial joints evolved in the common ancestor of all bony vertebrates, and that the zebrafish model can be used to investigate synovial joint diseases.
Researchers have discovered a system of protein interactions in the nuclear pore complex (NPC) that may contribute to the selectivity that allows it to facilitate the diffusion of cargo into and out of the cell's nucleus. Soluble karyopherins of the importin-β (impβ) family use RanGTP to transport cargos through the NPC. In the presence of physiological levels of impβ, cargo does not efficiently enter the nuclear interior. However, when RanGDP is added, the cargos exit the NPC and accumulate in the nucleus. The research has shown that RanGTP reduces the impβ-YFP rim fluorescence by modulating the way in which the NPC interacts with both cargo-bound impβ and free impβ. Two kinetically distinct impβ pools were detected within the pore, one stably bound to the NPC for many minutes, with and without RanGTP, while the other is only present when RanGTP is absent.
Chlamydia trachomatis, one of the most successful bacterial pathogens in humans, creates a replicative niche called the inclusion within host cells. This structure is extensively modified by the insertion of bacterial effector proteins called inclusion membrane proteins (Incs) to modulate host trafficking and signaling pathways to promote bacterial survival at different stages of infection. All Chlamydiae share a common dimorphic life cycle, converting between an infectious but non-dividing elementary body (EB) form and the non-infectious but replicative reticulate body (RB) form, which resides in the inclusion. In a study published in eLife, researchers used X-ray crystallographic structure determination to define the molecular mechanism of the sorting nexins 5 (SNX5)-IncE interaction, confirming that membrane trafficking proteins are major components of the inclusion proteome. Specifically, members of the endosomal sorting nexin (SNX) family are highly enriched, and the C. trachomatis IncE/CT116 protein was found to recruit SNX proteins that contain bin-amphiphysin-Rvs (BAR) domains SNX1, SNX2, SNX5, and SNX6. RNAi-mediated depletion of SNX5/SNX6 increased the production of infectious C. trachomatis progeny, suggesting that the SNX recruitment is not done to enable bacterial infection but may represent an attempt to circumvent SNX-enhanced bacterial destruction.
The cellular mechanism behind CD8+ T cell memory formation becoming defective in old age is largely unknown. This study shows that autophagy, a cellular lysosomal degradation pathway, plays a novel role in CD8+ T cell memory formation. Mice lacking the autophagy gene Atg7 in T cells failed to establish CD8+ T cell memory to influenza and MCMV infection. Autophagy levels were also found to be diminished in CD8+ T cells from aged mice, but they could be rejuvenated using the compound spermidine. Enhancing autophagy in an mTOR-independent manner may provide a safe way to improve vaccine responses in the elderly.
Researchers have used a protein microarray-based approach to survey the entire human transcription factor (TF) family and found a number of purified TFs with methylated CpG (mCpG)-dependent DNA-binding activities. This challenges the generally accepted notion that DNA methylation at promoter regions prohibits TF recruitment, resulting in transcription suppression. The team identified 41 TFs and 6 cofactors that demonstrated mCpG-dependent binding activity, suggesting that this is a widespread phenomenon among various TF subfamilies in humans. The transcriptional regulatory activity of these methylation-dependent TF–DNA interactions has also been explored, indicating that they do convey transcriptional activity in vivo. The study provides a new framework to understand the role and mechanism of TFs in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription.
The pre-placodal ectoderm develops into cranial sensory organs and ganglia. RNA-Seq was used to screen for novel direct placodal target genes of Six1 and Eya1, resulting in the discovery of hundreds of potential genes involved in placode development. Loss-of-function studies confirmed that certain transcriptional regulators of progenitor fates and neuronal/sensory differentiation require Six1 and Eya1 for their placodal expression. Defects in placode development underlie many congenital diseases. The study provides insights into the gene regulatory network regulating placodal neurogenesis downstream of Six1 and Eya1, suggesting new avenues of research into placode development and disease.
Adiponectin, a hormone produced by fat cells, has been extensively studied for its beneficial metabolic effects. However, little is known about its essential role in insulin regulation. Researchers from UT Southwestern Medical Center have uncovered a new function for adiponectin, revealing it to be critical in maintaining lipid homeostasis in regularly chow-fed mice when insulin is marginal. In the absence of both insulin and adiponectin, severe lipoatrophy and hyperlipidemia lead to lethality. Conversely, elevated adiponectin levels improve systemic lipid metabolism. These findings could have major implications for type 1 diabetes since the loss of β-cells is associated with a failure to effectively regenerate β-cell mass. Adiponectin is essential for lipid homeostasis and survival in the absence of insulin, making its role critical in insulin regulation.
Breast cancer genomes have revealed the presence of a novel form of mutation clusters, called kataegis, which are caused by AID/APOBEC cytidine deaminases that are sensitive to the 5' flanking sequence context. These enzymes act on single-stranded DNA and can cause mutations, including substitutions and genomic rearrangements. The study shows that AID/APOBEC-induced cytidine deamination in yeast can result in cancer-like kataegis, and that these clusters are strongly associated with transversions. The results provide insight into the mechanism of kataegis and point to the identity of the deaminases responsible for the clusters observed in breast cancers.
The article discusses a method of site-specific genome editing using the Cas9 protein from a Type II bacterial CRISPR system to induce double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) at specific sites in human cells. This system involves using a hybrid guide RNA that assembles with Cas9 to cleave foreign DNA. The RNA-guided genome editing can introduce site-specific genetic changes and has potential applications in human therapies and agricultural biotechnology. The study found that extension of the RNA sequence at the 3′ end enhances DNA targeting activity in vivo, and assembly into Cas9 is the limiting factor for Cas9-mediated DNA cleavage. The method can induce targeted genetic re-programming by initiating DNA repair pathways that lead to targeted genomic manipulation.
The article discusses a study that identifies a protein called LINKIN, which is required for maintaining cell adhesion during collective migration in the developing C. elegans male gonad. It is a conserved transmembrane protein with seven atypical FG-GAP domains in the extracellular domain. The study suggests that LINKIN promotes adhesion between neighboring cells through its extracellular domain and regulates microtubule dynamics through RUVBL proteins at its intracellular domain, and that effective collective migration requires components promoting motility and those contributing to tissue integrity and coordination. The male gonad in C. elegans serves as a model for collective cell migration, has a simple organization of one migratory leader cell and somatic follower cells, and requires genes such as Notch signaling to specify roles between leader and follower cells. Mutations in lnkn-1 cause detachment of somatic gonadal cells during male gonad migration and result in a partially elongated gonad and male sterility. The study also identifies homologs of LINKIN in other organisms and calls this protein family LINKIN.
Researchers have discovered the oldest fossilised skeleton of a flying squirrel aged at 11.6 million years. The discovery will clarify the evolutionary path of the species and allow scientists to recalibrate divergence times between tree and flying squirrels. Previously, the identification of fossilised flying squirrels was based solely on dental features that were not unique and could overlap with other squirrel groups, making identification difficult. The new discovery has enabled scientists to confirm that the flying squirrel is a monophyletic clade, and to understand that flying squirrels experienced very little morphological change for almost 12 million years. The new data also suggests that flying squirrels and tree squirrels diverged much earlier than previously thought, maybe as far back as the Eocene era some 36 to 56 million years ago.
Researchers have identified a gene, nr4A, that plays a crucial role in the positioning of anterior- and posterior-pole localisation and the promotion of tissue patterning at the anterior-posterior (AP) axis ends in planarians. Using RNA sequencing techniques, they found that the expression of nr4A resulted in normal restriction of tissues to their proper domains at both ends of the AP axis. Conversely, inhibiting nr4A caused abnormal tissue patterns leading to the iterative and continuous appearance of ectopic eyes and ectopic internal foci of epidermal cells. The researchers conclude that nr4A is a novel transcription factor that regulates tissue pattern at both ends of the AP axis.
This study describes an approach to study single genes in single cells and develop a single-cell model of steroid-receptor mediated gene activation. The study finds that steroids drive mRNA synthesis by frequency modulation of transcription, which gives rise to the well-known analog dose response across the population. The study also finds that changing steroid levels affects the frequency of active periods, but neither the duration of the active period nor the number of polymerases fired during the active period. The study proposes and validates a stochastic model of steroid-receptor activity for a reporter gene which provides a new framework for studying this ubiquitous mechanism of eukaryotic gene regulation.
This study investigates how manipulating neurogenesis in adult mice affects synaptic transmission to mature dentate neurons. The results show that enhancing neurogenesis through the deletion of the pro-apoptotic Bax gene in stem cells reduces excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) and spine density in mature neurons, whereas genetic ablation of neurogenesis increased EPSCs in mature neurons. Furthermore, Bax deletion in developing and mature dentate neurons increased EPSCs and prevented neurogenesis-induced synaptic suppression. These findings suggest that neurogenesis modifies synaptic transmission to mature neurons in a manner consistent with a redistribution of pre-existing synapses to newly integrating neurons. Additionally, the non-apoptotic function of the Bax signaling pathway contributes to ongoing synaptic refinement within the dentate circuit. It is also demonstrated that enhancing neurogenesis through the non-selective paradigm of environmental enrichment generates a net increase in functional connectivity of mature neurons.
The document discusses the different types of circadian clocks organisms use to anticipate and synchronize with the day-night cycle. Some organisms use free running clocks, while others use "hourglass" clocks, which are simpler stimulus-response strategies. The document explores when each type of clock is sufficient or preferable. It finds that free running clocks efficiently project out light intensity fluctuations due to weather patterns, but are vulnerable to internal noise. "Hourglass" clocks, on the other hand, can outperform free running clocks at sufficiently high internal noise. The study used simulations of diverse biochemical oscillators to demonstrate that different clock architectures are best suited to different relative strengths of external and internal noise. The document emphasizes the importance of experiments that specifically look for "hourglass" clocks and highlights the need to experimentally probe regulatory strategies by varying different kinds of noise independently when possible.
Researchers have discovered a new type of macrophage that operates in the skin to promote tissue repair and inflammation reduction. These Skin Transendothelial Radio-resistant Anti-inflammatory Macrophages (STREAM) demonstrate unique capabilities, such as extending protrusions across endothelial junctions in order to capture blood-borne macromolecules - a characteristic that stands them apart from other skin-resident macrophages. Moreover, these macrophages possess an anti-inflammatory transcriptional profile that sets them apart from other subsets. Unlike migratory epidermal Langerhans cells and dermal dendritic cells, which collaborate with draining lymph nodes, skin-resident macrophages help provide tissue repair and settle inflammation from sites of trauma.
Researchers have developed a computational method to predict cohesin-and-CTCF binding sites that form intra-TAD DNA loops, providing finer regulatory control in restricting enhancer-promoter interactions for selective, high-level expression of gene targets. These intra-TAD loops anchor genes and have the same features of TADs, including chromatin contact insulation, blockage of repressive histone mark spread, and ubiquity across tissues. This study reveals the role of intra-TAD cohesin and CTCF binding in nuclear organization associated with widespread insulation of distal enhancer activity.
Microglia, which play a vital role in regulating synapse development and refinement in the developing brain, are found to be equally important in adult neurogenesis. Through transient depletion of microglia in the healthy adult mouse brain, the study shows that microglia are necessary for the normal functional development of adult-born granule cells (abGCs) in the olfactory bulb. It was found that microglia promoted the development of excitatory synapses onto the developing abGCs, as they interacted with their motile processes to mushroom spines, promoting synaptic stabilization and maturation. The study also revealed that microglia affect abGCs’ integration into circuits in the adult brain in the dentate gyrus (DG) and olfactory bulb (OB). Microglial activation via sensory deafferentation in the OB decreases the number of adult-born neurons and their spine density. While most studies on microglial regulation of adult neurogenesis till date have focused on the early stages of the process occurring in the neurogenic niches, this study demonstrates the importance of microglial functions in abGC development, both in anesthetized and awake mice.
Plant growth and morphogenesis is controlled by cell elongation, a process regulated by hormonal and environmental signals including auxin, brassinosteroid, gibberellin, light, and temperature. The molecular mechanisms that integrate these signals to ensure cohesive cellular responses remain unclear. In this study, a molecular circuit that integrates all major growth-regulating signals is illustrated, including the interaction between the auxin-response factor ARF6, the light/temperature-regulated transcription factor PIF4, and the brassinosteroid-signaling transcription factor BZR1. The trio cooperatively regulates a large number of common target genes, but their DNA-binding activities are blocked by the gibberellin-inactivated repressor RGA. Additionally, a tripartite HLH/bHLH module modulates auxin sensitivity according to developmental and environmental signals. The results demonstrate a central growth-regulation circuit that integrates hormonal, environmental, and developmental controls of cell elongation in Arabidopsis hypocotyl.
The authors present a new automated method for tracking and identifying neurons in C. elegans called "fast Deep Neural Correspondence" (fDNC), which uses the transformer network architecture. The model is trained on semi-synthetic data and can track neurons across time and identify corresponding neurons across individuals without requiring the animal to be transformed or straightened. The method achieves high accuracy, even when using only position information, and can be applied in real-time, making it suitable for future applications like brain-machine interfaces. The authors used a simulator to generate semi-synthetic data, which allowed them to train on larger datasets and avoid the need for experimentally acquired ground truth correspondence.
The protein complex AP2 is responsible for linking protein cargo to the endocytic machinery, but it was not clear how AP2 was activated on the plasma membrane. However, it is now known that the membrane-associated proteins FCHo and SGIP1 convert AP2 into an open, active conformation, and this is achieved by exposing the membrane and cargo binding sites on AP2. The domain of FCHo that induces this rearrangement is an uncharacterized 90 amino acid motif that directly binds AP2. Mutations in the FCHo gene decrease AP2 activity and disrupt clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The FCHo/SGIP proteins evolved to promote endocytosis by binding to and stabilizing the open conformation of AP2, so that they can regulate AP2 during the formation of clathrin-coated pits.
The study explores the morphological diversity of cutaneous sensory afferents in hairy skin of the mouse using genetically-directed sparse labeling with a sensory neuron-specific alkaline phosphatase reporter. The authors present the survey of cutaneous sensory arbor morphologies in hairy skin of the mouse, revealing 10 morphologically distinct types between 719 arbors, among which 77 are fully reconstructed, constraining models of receptive field size and structure among cutaneous sensory neurons. The diversity of cutaneous receptor subtypes has been placed on a foundation that is increasingly defined in molecular terms. The study is of interest for many reasons; most obviously, it informs our understanding of receptive field size and structure.
The article discusses the role of promiscuous enzyme activity in evolutionary adaptation, and the impact of endogenous and exogenous substrates on enzyme specialization. The authors describe their study using Escherichia coli nitro/quinone reductase NfsA as a model system to select for improved chloramphenicol detoxification. They simultaneously randomized eight active-site residues and evaluated over 250 million reconfigured variants to identify the most effective chloramphenicol reductases. Analysis revealed complex epistatic interactions and demonstrated that endogenous cellular metabolites hold considerable potential to shape evolutionary outcomes. The study emphasizes the importance of negative selection to effect enzyme specialization and offers an application for the evolved genes as dual-purpose selectable/counter-selectable markers.
A study published in eLife has shown that people regain full visual attention within 30 milliseconds of their vision shifting after an eye movement. The study tested eight subjects’ detection of a target amidst moving patterns of dots. The study found that humans are capable of tracking a target object throughout a task, even when it moves, thanks to retinotopic attentional shift. Moving the eyes to a new position requires a corresponding rapid shift in attention from one part of the brain to another. After a short period following this shift, the brain’s attention processes return to the strength they held before the saccade.
Researchers from the Stowers Institute of Medical Research have developed a new imaging technique, which they call "structured illumination microscopy with single-particle averaging" (SPA-SIM), to image the yeast centrosome (also known as the spindle pole body, SPB), which plays an essential role in cell division. SPA-SIM allowed the researchers to better understand the process of SPB duplication and insertion into the nuclear envelope, and demonstrated that SPB duplication begins with the formation of a Sfi1 filament at mitotic exit, followed by assembly of a complex Spc29- and Spc42-dependent complex at its tip. The observation that proteins involved in membrane insertion, such as Mps2, Bbp1, and Ndc1, also accumulate at the new SPB early in duplication suggests that SPB assembly and NE insertion are linked events. Defects in SPB duplication have been linked to cancer and to other diseases. 

Complexins are small soluble proteins that help regulate neurotransmitter release in interneuronal communication. They can play activating or inhibitory roles, and it is known that their accessory helix inhibits neurotransmitter release. However, a satisfactory model for this activity has not emerged yet. The study discussed in the document looks at different models to understand how complexin-I inhibits release. Using NMR spectroscopy, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), and electrophysiological data, the study shows that complexin-I's accessory helix does not insert into synaptobrevin-truncated SNARE complexes in solution. Instead, it hinders neurotransmitter release through electrostatic and steric repulsion enabled by its location between the vesicle and plasma membranes. These findings suggest a new model for the inhibitory activity of the complexin accessory helix.
The document discusses a method called CUT&Tag, which is used to identify potential regulatory elements by mapping chromatin accessibility. The authors show that by modifying the tagmentation conditions for histone H3K4me2 or H3K4me3 CUT&Tag, antibody-tethered tagmentation of accessible DNA sites is redirected to produce chromatin accessibility maps that are indistinguishable from the best ATAC-seq maps. The method identifies transcription-coupled accessible regulatory sites and can be done in parallel with CUT&Tag maps of other epitopes with all steps from nuclei to amplified sequencing-ready libraries performed in single PCR tubes in the laboratory or on a home workbench. The authors also show that a simple modification of CUT&Tag method can identify nucleosome depleted regions (NDRs) genome-wide at regulatory elements adjacent to transcription-associated histone marks in human cells. The modifications to the protocol involve tagmentation under low-salt conditions, resulting in increased binding of epitope-tethered Tn5 to a nearby NDR prior to tagmentation. This approach produces narrow heatmap patterns for the majority of peaks, providing better alignment for ATAC-seq datasets. The authors demonstrate that CUT&Tag can be performed easily and safely on a home workbench using minimal equipment and space requirements.
Chemokines CX3CL1/fractalkine and CXCL16 are often present in tumours without an appropriate expression of their classical receptors. When searching for alternative receptors, researchers found that all cells that either express or are transfected with the chemokine ligands bound the soluble chemokines with high affinity and responded by phosphorylation of intracellular kinases, enhanced proliferation, and anti-apoptosis. This signalling network requires the intracellular domain and apparent dimerization of the transmembrane chemokine ligand, thus generating auto- or paracrine signals by activating their transmembrane forms. This novel mechanism is termed “inverse signalling” and may be an autocrine feedback and fine-tuning system in the communication between cells that supports uptake and proliferation in tumours. 
A study conducted on monogamous rodents showed that the disruption of pair bonds altered the size and morphology of lung cancer cell spheroids, suggesting an increased oncogenic potential. The study also found that bonding suppressed tumorigenicity in nude mice, indicating that the protective effects of pair bonds persisted even after bonding ceased. The results highlight the pro-oncogenic effects of pair-bond disruption and point to the acquisition of expression signatures in cancer cells that are relevant to the bonding experiences of serum donors. The study questions the ability of conventional mouse models to capture the whole spectrum of the impact of the host in tumorigenesis. Evidence from anecdotal and experiential sources, as well as several epidemiological studies, suggest that cancer and social interactions are connected. Both marital status and emotional factors can affect the development and progression of cancer. 

In conclusion, the study shows that pair-bonding experience can influence tumorigenesis, and emotional factors can have an impact on cancer development and progression. The research suggests that rodents that form long-term pair bonds may provide more accurate and informative animal models for the study of pair-bond disruption in tumorigenesis.
This study focuses on the molecular structure of Kinesin-5, a motor protein crucial to the accurate segregation of chromosomes during mitosis. The study focuses on the bipolar organization of Kinesin-5 and its ability to organize four subunits into a bipolar tetramer. The central bipolar assembly (BASS) domain is essential for this organization and hence for Kinesin-5 activity and mitotic cell viability. The study found that BASS is a novel four-helix bundle structure with anti-parallel coiled coils at its center, stabilized by alternating hydrophobic and ionic four-helical interfaces. The N-terminal BASS helices bend as they emerge from the central bundle, swapping partner helices to form dimeric parallel coiled-coils at both ends, which are offset by 90°.
Researchers explored how the primate retina balances the need to change gain rapidly and reliably when photons arrive rarely at individual rod photoreceptors. They found that the weakest backgrounds that decrease the gain of the retinal output signals are similar to those that increase human behavioral threshold and identified a novel site of gain control in the retinal circuitry. Sensory systems encode an enormous range of input signals and maintaining sensitivity as inputs change requires adaptational mechanisms that adjust the gain or amplification of neural signals to match their limited dynamic range to the range of the input signals a cell receives. Such gain control mechanisms operate under challenging conditions as the inputs they encounter can vary rapidly in time and locally in the space of possible stimuli.
Astrocytes may play a key role in synapse elimination, a process that is vital for the precise formation of neuronal circuits during development, according to new research. The study shows that ATP released by astrocytes in a way that is dependent on IP3R2, a subunit solely expressed in astrocytes, has a crucial impact on purinergic signalling and prevents neurological disease. The study highlights how astrocytes not only provide structural and metabolic support to neighbouring neurons, but also participate in synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity during development.
The document discusses the use of Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) in analyzing protein sequences to gain information about their structure, function, and evolutionary history. RBM can effectively model protein families from sequence data and provide biologically interpretable features related to structure, function, and phylogenetic identity. The RBM can also be used to design new protein sequences with putative properties by composing and 'turning up' or 'turning down' different modes. The RBM framework is shown to be a powerful computational tool that can be used to characterize and exploit quantitatively the genotype-phenotype relationship specific to a protein family. RBM can also be modified to design new sequences with very high probabilities by appropriate duplication of hidden units while preserving desired functionalities. RBM can be used to derive effective pairwise interactions between sites to estimate contacts and provide good accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art methods based on direct couplings. In a fully-blind setting, RBM contact predictions are comparable to plmDCA, a state-of-the-art procedure for inferring pairwise couplings in Direct-Coupling Analysis, but the computational cost of training RBM is higher. Finally, the RBM is shown to be capable of designing new sequences that have desired features and high values of fitness and are well-correlated with RBM probabilities.
Researchers have developed software that untwists the Caenorhabditis elegans nematode embryo to allow the study of neurodevelopmental events in later embryogenesis with 3D positional data on seam cell nuclei, neurons and neurites. The method represents the first complete tracking of cell positions in the context of the entire embryo from the beginning of twitching until hatching. The study’s lead author, Martijn Huynen, suggests the technique could be used to catalog C. elegans neurodevelopment, providing a foundation to understanding previously inaccessible periods of embryogenesis.
Researchers have discovered a new RNA molecule called Cerox1 that regulates a crucial energy-generating process in cells, called oxidative phosphorylation. The molecule modulates the levels of mitochondrial complex I subunit transcripts in a way that binds to microRNA-488-3p, raising the protein abundance of complex I and helps clear the body of dangerous free radicals that can provoke disease. Cerox1 also protects cells against rotenone, a toxin that inhibits this activity. The results indicate that lncRNAs represent novel targets for modulating energy-producing enzymatic activity.
Chronic itch, a highly prevalent disorder with limited treatment options, is thought to be driven by both the nervous and immune systems, but the fundamental molecular and cellular interactions that trigger the development of itch and the acute-to-chronic itch transition remain unknown. A recent study shows that skin-infiltrating neutrophils are key initiators of itch in atopic dermatitis, the most prevalent chronic itch disorder. Neutrophil depletion significantly attenuated itch-evoked scratching in a mouse model of atopic dermatitis. Chronic itch is a debilitating disorder that affects millions of people worldwide, and unlike acute itch, which can facilitate removal of crawling insects, parasites, or irritants, persistent scratching in chronic itch disorders has no discernable benefit, damaging skin and leading to secondary infection, disfiguring lesions, and exacerbation of disease severity. The most common chronic itch disorder is atopic dermatitis, which affects fifteen million people in the United States alone.
The role of the gene Staufen (Stau) in controlling the variability of the posterior boundary of the anterior domain of the Hb gene (xHb) in Drosophila embryogenesis is unclear. This study used improved measurement methods to show that xHb of stau– mutants moves posteriorly by 10% of the embryo length to the wild type (WT) position in nuclear cycle 14 and that its variability over short time windows is comparable to that of WT. Moreover, the upstream Bicoid (Bcd) gradients in stau- mutants show equivalent relative intensity noise to that of WT, and downstream Even-skipped (Eve) and cephalic furrow (CF) show the same positional errors as these factors in WT. The results suggest that threshold-dependent activation and self-organized filtering are not mutually exclusive in early Drosophila embryogenesis.
The PapC protein is responsible for the assembly and secretion of P pili in uropathogenic E. coli, which are important for the colonization of the human kidney epithelium. The protein's translocation domain contains a large β-barrel occluded by a plug domain, which is displaced to allow the translocation of pilus subunits. This mechanism is controlled by a β-hairpin and an α-helix that are involved in allosteric signal communication. A hybrid method combining evolutionary and molecular dynamics studies of the native translocation domain and mutants lacking the β-hairpin and/or the α-helix was developed to investigate these elements. Analysis suggests distinct regions within the translocation domain that link these elements, modulating PapC gating. Antibiotic sensitivity and electrophysiology experiments confirmed the functional roles of four distinct regions. Overall, this study illuminates the gating mechanism of PapC ushers and its importance in maintaining outer membrane permeability.
The brainstem plays an important role in regulating the sleep-wake cycle, but little is known about the population activity within the brainstem and its functional interactions with other brain regions. This study uses in vivo electrophysiological approaches in mice to investigate the state-dependent ensemble dynamics in the brainstem, particularly the pons. The results show slow, state-predictive brainstem ensemble dynamics and state-dependent interactions between the brainstem and the hippocampus. Brainstem populations can predict pupil dilation and vigilance states and exhibit longer prediction power than hippocampal CA1 neurons. P-waves are accompanied by synchronous firing of brainstem neurons during both REM and NREM sleep, and they functionally interact with CA1 activity in a state-dependent manner. The study confirms highly diverse state-dependent firing in the brainstem and also confirms state-dependent and cell-type-specific firing. Brainstem populations have predictive power for pupil diameter and sleep-wake states. The study sheds light on the roles of brainstem populations in sleep regulation and ultimately in the functions of sleep states.
The Robust Activity Marking (RAM) system is a tool developed to identify and interrogate ensembles of neurons responsible for encoding specific experiences in the brain. It uses a synthetic activity-regulated promoter that is strongly induced by neuronal activity and a modified Tet-Off system for improved temporal control. The RAM system can be combined into a single adeno-associated virus, making it versatile and easy to use for a range of species. The system uses immediate early genes (IEGs) such as Fos, Arc, and Egr1, which have low basal expression and strong induction by neuronal activity to identify active ensembles of a specific cell type and anatomical connectivity. The RAM system provides high sensitivity, selectivity, and versatility and has been used to investigate active neuronal ensembles in several regions of the murine and drosophila brain.
Scientists have created improved molecular tension sensors to advance the study of mechanobiology, allowing a better understanding of how cells react to and generate mechanical loads. The new sensors have predictable sensitivities and can provide insight into the role of proteins in controlling the regulation of load-bearing proteins in different mechanical contexts. By predicting the mechanical behaviour of 1020 designs, the researchers hope to inspire the rational design of sensors suitable for diverse applications.
Researchers have discovered that acetylcholine (ACh) plays a key role in habenular neurons by controlling the size and release frequency of glutamate at synapses, which creates a "synergistic function" important for modulation of cholinergic circuit function and behavior. In experiments observing mice with eliminated ACh in medial habenula (MHb) neurons, researchers found that ACh alters glutamate corelease and presynaptic facilitation. They also found that mice lacking CHAT in habenular neurons were insensitive to nicotine-conditioned reward and withdrawal. Cholinergic projection neurons in the MHb synapse in the interpeduncular nucleus (IPN), which contains extremely high levels of AChE. Finally, the researchers established that the Kiaa1107-Cre line specifically targets the cholinergic population of habenular neurons without affecting other cholinergic neurons.
The prevailing view in cell biology identifying the centrosome as pivotal in governing cell polarity has been challenged by new research. Instead, a crucial role is attributed to microtubules stabilized by CAMSAP2 in controlling directional migration on two-dimensional substrates and for the establishment of cell asymmetry which enables polarized trafficking. CAMSAP2 non-centrosomal microtubules are also important for persistent endothelial cell sprouting during in vivo zebrafish vessel development. CAMSAP2-depleted ECs were unable to form long sprouts in 3D, while they were capable of initiating protrusions, highlighting an important and specific role of CAMSAP2 in EC morphology in 3D.
Enteric fever is a serious bacterial infection caused by Salmonella Typhi and Salmonella Paratyphi A. This study investigated metabolite signals associated with the disease using two-dimensional gas chromatography with time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GCxGC/TOFMS) on plasma from patients with S.Typhi and S. Paratyphi A infections and asymptomatic controls, and identified 695 individual metabolite peaks. The study found that reproducible and serovar-specific systemic biomarkers can be detected during enteric fever, and that a combination of six metabolites could accurately define the etiological agent. The study defines several biologically plausible metabolites that can be used to detect enteric fever and potentially diagnose other systemic bacterial infections.
The document describes an alternative transgenic approach to generate focused expression and enable cell-type-specific manipulation in the nervous system. The approach captures distal enhancers for more focused expression, resulting in transgenic mouse lines that label small subsets of neurons in brain substructures, including known and novel cell types. The research team established over 200 lines, and images and other information about each line are available online. This approach is a viable strategy for producing driver strains that complement those generated through other genetic approaches, and it provides a platform for genetic control of a wide variety of neuronal cell types, as well as for discovering new subtypes of known neuronal cell types.
Researchers have discovered that the Gabrb3 m-/p+ mutation affects neurons in the cerebellar nuclei differently in male and female mice. The mutation affects GABAA receptor β3 subunits, among the maternal alleles deleted in Angelman syndrome, and is linked to autism. Wild-type mice showed sex differences in synaptic excitation, inhibition, and intrinsic properties, while Gabrb3 m-/p+ male mice showed enlarged mGluR1/5 responses and accelerated spontaneous firing, compensating for the changes in neural signalling. Sex differences in cerebellar physiology produce similar behavioural output but provide distinct baselines for responses to mutations.
The article describes a study comparing the neuroanatomy of the chemosensory system in two nematode species, Caenorhabditis elegans and Pristionchus pacificus. The research aimed to understand how their nervous systems have diverged and identify potential substrates for evolutionary novelty. The study found that while the number and position of neurons are conserved between the two species, there are morphological differences in some of the amphid cilia, and striking patterns of conservation and divergence in synaptic connectivity. These findings highlight the importance of sensory information processing in the evolution of behavior. The article provides a detailed description of the neuroanatomy of the two species and discusses their differences and similarities.
This paper identifies a new mechanism called "cell sliding" that drives epithelial morphogenesis in animal development. This mechanism involves directional changes in cell position relative to posterior neighbors by sliding in one direction. The study used live-imaging analysis and a three-dimensional vertex model to investigate the counterclockwise rotation of the Drosophila hindgut. The paper also discusses other mechanisms involved in left-right asymmetry formation in vertebrates and the role of cell chirality in this process. The findings suggest that chiral cell sliding is a novel mechanism that induces anisotropic changes in tissue morphology.
The genetic diversity of the bacteriophage population is vast and has been understudied compared to other microbes. To understand the phage population structure, researchers isolated, sequenced and compared 627 phages of Mycobacterium smegmatis. They found that the phage population is not closed and there is a constant influx of genes from other sources, indicating a continuum of genetic diversity. The study was performed by a consortium of academic institutions, which demonstrated the benefits of a disseminated, structured program involving large numbers of freshman undergraduates in scientific discovery. The findings highlight the potential of using viral discovery and genomics for course-based research experiences and advancing our understanding of phage diversity.
A study conducted on 538 captive chimpanzees tested whether certain personality traits were associated with longevity in primates. The study found that higher agreeableness was related to longevity in male chimpanzees and higher openness may be related to longer life in females. The findings link the literature on survival strategies in humans and nonhuman primates and suggest that evolution favors low aggression and high-quality social bonds in males. The study aimed to expand on the understanding of the links between personality traits and life history strategy in nonhuman primates and humans. The study used data from a large sample of captive chimpanzees living in zoological parks, research facilities, and sanctuaries. Personality was assessed by ratings on two comparable questionnaires that assessed a wide range of traits. The study found that higher extraversion and agreeableness in chimpanzees were related to longer life, while lower boldness was related to a slower life-history strategy.
Dectin-1, an innate immune receptor expressed on dendritic cells and macrophages, has been found to play a critical role in recognizing and signaling tumor cells to assist natural killer (NK) cells in killing tumor cells that express N-glycan structures. This activation of IRF5 transcription factor and downstream gene induction enhances the tumoricidal activity of NK cells. Mice genetically deficient in either Dectin-1 or IRF5 showed exacerbated in vivo tumor growth. These findings uncover a new facet of the C-type lectin receptor family of receptors in the orchestration of anti-tumor innate immune responses, with implications for potential targeted therapies.
The ability for newborn mammals to efficiently use milk fat as an energy source is essential for survival, but it is unclear how this trait is acquired and regulated. In this study, it was found that under the control of PPARα, the genes required for lipid catabolism are transcribed before birth so that the neonatal liver has a prompt capacity to extract energy from milk upon suckling. A fetal glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-PPARα axis was also discovered, in which GR directly regulates the transcriptional activation of PPARα by binding to its promoter. This study identifies an endocrine developmental axis in which fetal GR primes the activity of PPARα in anticipation of the sudden shifts in postnatal nutrient source and metabolic demands.
Researchers have conducted a study to understand the unique features of humoral responses to COVID-19 infection and vaccination, including different vaccine platforms, in order to develop vaccines that protect against emerging and future variants. The study, which used high-resolution Spike-specific deep mutational scanning phage display library to profile the epitopes and sites of escape for serum antibodies from people who had been infected, vaccinated or a combination of both, found that vaccination induced a broader antibody response across the Spike protein but induced a singular antibody response at the Stem Helix-Helix epitope, which could favor variants that emerge with these mutations. The study has implications for predicting the selection of immune escape variants at a population level.
The article discusses the functions of two closely related genes in C. elegans, called SET-9 and SET-26. While they share redundant functions in germline development, SET-26 alone plays a key role in longevity and heat stress response. SET-9 and SET-26 bind to H3K4me3 with adjacent acetylation marks in vitro and in vivo. In the soma, SET-26 acts through DAF-16 to modulate longevity, but in the germline, SET-9 and SET-26 restrict H3K4me3 domains around SET-9 and SET-26 binding sites, and regulate the expression of specific target genes, with critical consequences on germline development. Inactivation of set-26 extends lifespan and improves heat resistance but has no effect on germline maintenance, while SET-9 and SET-26 act redundantly to maintain normal germline function. The study also investigates the transcriptional profiles of the long-lived germlineless glp-1; set-26 double mutant, revealing the genes that show statistically significant expression change in the glp-1; set-26 double mutant compared to glp-1 mutant.
Researchers have developed a method called automated reporter quantification in vivo (ARQiv) that enables in vivo high-throughput screening in zebrafish, which was combined with robotics to allow whole-organism high-throughput screening (ARQiv-HTS). In a primary screen, this platform quantified cell-specific fluorescent reporters in over 500,000 transgenic zebrafish larvae to identify FDA-approved drugs that increased the number of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. 24 drugs were confirmed as inducers of endocrine differentiation and/or stimulators of beta-cell proliferation. The studies demonstrate the power of ARQiv-HTS for drug discovery and provide unique insights into signaling pathways controlling beta-cell mass, which are potential therapeutic targets for treating diabetes.
Shugoshin, a protein found in the pericentromeric region of chromosomes, plays dual roles in biorientation in budding yeast, according to a study in the eLife journal. The researchers found shugoshin recruits the chromosome-organising complex, condensin, to the pericentromere, which biases sister kinetochores towards capture by microtubules from opposite poles, and also maintains true orientation by engaging the error correction machinery. Shugosh
The single-stranded DNA binding protein (SSB) is essential for DNA maintenance and protects single-stranded DNA from damage. SSB binds to single-stranded DNA with a variable footprint, reflecting partial or full wrapping of DNA around a tetramer of SSB. The extent of wrapping is important in altering interactions between or throughout nucleoprotein complexes. RecO and RecOR, which interact with SSB, further condense the complex. Using single-molecule force spectroscopy, the researchers observed intramolecular condensation of nucleoprotein complexes which exceeded expectations based on simple wrapping transitions. The researchers propose that RecOR, and possibly other SSB-interacting proteins, function to alter long-range interactions between or throughout nucleoprotein complexes by microscopically altering wrapping and bridging distant sites. The nature of this condensation is due to the ability of SSB to interact with distant sites along the ssDNA - either through dimerization of SSB tetramers or through the partial wrapping of distant ssDNA sites on a single SSB protomer - and one role of RecOR may be to enhance these distant interactions, which in turn would facilitate annealing of complementary strands.
The SWELL1 protein is an essential subunit of the Volume Regulated Anion Channel (VRAC), which is activated by hypotonic solutions and regulates cellular volume homeostasis. This structure of full-length human homo-hexameric SWELL1 was determined by high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy. A trimer of dimers assembly with symmetry mismatch between the pore-forming domain and the cytosolic leucine-rich repeat domains was revealed. A charged residue at the narrowest constriction of the SWELL1 homomeric channel is an important pore determinant of heteromeric VRAC; a mutation in the flexible N-terminal portion of SWELL1 affects pore properties, suggesting a putative link between intracellular structures and channel regulation. The structure provides a scaffold for further dissecting the heterogeneity and mechanism of activation of VRAC. VRAC is implicated in diverse physiological processes including volume regulation, cell proliferation, release of excitatory amino acids, and apoptosis. VRAC is suggested to play a role in a variety of human diseases including stroke, diabetes, and cancer. A causative link has been established between a chromosomal translocation in the SWELL1 gene and a human B cell deficiency disease, agammaglobulinemia.
Imprinting is a process of gene expression that occurs during seed development in plants and is associated with differential DNA methylation of parental alleles, particularly at transposable elements (TEs). The study aims to investigate intraspecific variation in imprinting, coupled with analysis of DNA methylation and small RNAs, among three Arabidopsis strains with diverse seed phenotypes. The majority of imprinted genes were parentally biased in the same manner among all strains. However, the study identified several examples of allele-specific imprinting correlated with intraspecific epigenetic variation at a TE. The role of TEs in establishing or maintaining imprinted expression underscores a link between TE dynamics, variation in imprinting, and selection for parent-of-origin-specific gene expression. The study concludes that there is standing variation in imprinting even in recently diverged genotypes due to intraspecific epiallelic variation.
A recent trial has explored the potential use of aspirin as a preventative for tuberculous meningitis (TBM)-related brain infarction through anti-thrombotic, anti-inflammatory and pro-resolution effects. 120 adults with TMB were randomised, receiving either 81mg or 1000mg aspirin or a placebo for 60 days alongside dexamethasone and anti-tuberculosis drugs. The trial found that whilst aspirin did not show a statistically significant difference in reducing established infarcts or deaths, evidence suggested that aspirin may prevent these from occurring, particularly amongst those with microbiologically-confirmed TBM. A larger, phase III clinical trial may support the use of aspirin as adjunctive therapy in TBM.
The document discusses the generation of gut macrophages from circulating monocytes and the factors that contribute to their tissue residency. Monocyte differentiation under conditions of inflammation has been well-studied, but their differentiation under non-inflammatory conditions remains unclear. The researchers utilized cell ablation and precursor engraftment to investigate this process and identified factors associated with the gradual adaptation of monocytes to tissue residency. Comparison of monocyte differentiation into colon and ileum-resident macrophages revealed the graduated acquisition of gut segment-specific gene expression signatures. Transcriptome analysis revealed the distinct identities of gut segment resident macrophages and shed light on the kinetics and gradual gene expression of specific factors for their establishment of their identities. The study highlights the existence of considerable macrophage heterogeneity, not only between different organs but also within given tissues.
The bivalent hypothesis proposes that genes which regulate early lineage decisions are poised in stem/progenitor cells by a balance between a repressor histone modification (H3K27me3) and an activator modification (H3K4me3), mediated by the Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 (PRC2), although this mechanism has not been tested for genes not required until terminal differentiation. REST (RE1 Silencing Transcription Factor) is expressed highly in stem cells and is established as a global repressor of terminal neuronal genes. This study aimed to establish whether REST target genes are poised by a mechanism independent of Polycomb, even at promoters which bear the H3K27me3 mark. The study showed that REST-controlled genes are actively repressed in stem cells through a balance of the H3K4me3 mark and a repressor complex that relies on histone deacetylase activity. These chromatin distinctions between pro-neural and terminal neuronal genes are established at the embryonic stem cell stage by two parallel, but distinct, repressor pathways. These findings have implications for gene regulation in undifferentiated pluripotent cells.
This article discusses the relationship between working memory and conscious perception in the brain. Recent studies have challenged the idea that working memory requires conscious perception, with some suggesting that subjects can recall information about unseen stimuli. The authors of this article conducted experiments using visual masking and magnetoencephalography to investigate the possibility of non-conscious working memory and its neural mechanisms. They found that participants were able to report the location of unseen targets above chance level after several seconds, but that neural activity during non-conscious working memory was different than during conscious perception and conscious working memory. Their findings contradict models that rely on sustained neural firing, but support recent theories of "activity-silent" working memory. The authors present a theoretical framework and simulations showing how slowly decaying synaptic changes may allow neural cell assemblies to go dormant during the delay, but be retrieved above chance-level after several seconds.
The Golgi complex is an important sorting compartment in eukaryotic cells. Arf guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Arf-GEFs) regulate the movement of substances through the Golgi by activating Arf GTPase trafficking pathways, but the mechanisms underlying their function are not well understood. A crystal structure has been revealed that shows the N-terminal DCB and HUS regulatory domains of the Arf-GEF Sec7 form a single structural unit. This domain amplifies the ability of Sec7 to activate Arf1 on the membrane surface, facilitating membrane insertion of the Arf1 amphipathic helix. The DCB/HUS regulatory domain enhances the activation of Arf1, implying a role in chaperoning the insertion of Arf1 into the Golgi membrane. The study also investigated the dimerization of Sec7 and found that it is primarily mediated by the C-terminal HDS4 domain.
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a cellular process that regulates a variety of functions. Several ADP-ribosyl transferase (ART) enzyme families have been identified that can modify proteins. PARP is the most well-characterized class of ARTs which generates long chains of repeating ADP-ribose units on their protein targets. ADP-ribosylation is reversible and can be removed by specific enzymes such as PARG and ARH3. A new form of ADPr, Ser-ADPr, was recently identified and it is reversible during the response to DNA damage. ARH3 has been identified as the specific hydrolase capable of removing Ser-ADPr from histones and other proteins. This new form of ADPr signalling requires precise regulation and understanding its dynamics could provide significant insights to the regulation of histone modification.
Neuroscientists are producing huge amounts of data through neural connectomics techniques, which aim to understand the neural functions and discover neuron types and their relation to microcircuitry. Scientists have developed a non-parametric Bayesian technique which combines information used by biologists, including connectivity, cell body location, and spatial distribution of synapses, to identify neuron types and microcircuitry patterns in connectomics data. This approach enables anatomical insights from these emerging datasets and is scalable to work on biological data. The model is based on the distance-dependent stochastic block model and is able to recover the correct number of cell types and the spatial extent of each type. The model works well on synthetic data and inference cases where the data were generated with assumptions different from theirs. The scientists predict that this approach will be useful in discovering the underlying microcircuitry of neural tissues, particularly in large datasets, where it is hard to reconcile with many other methods.
The relationship between the immediate value and long-term reinforcement value of a reward is unclear. The authors of this study report that fruit flies prefer D-arabinose to L-arabinose but form long-term memories of L-arabinose more reliably. They found that L-arabinose-generated memories require the sugar receptor Gr43a and that L- and D-arabinose activate Gr43a-expressing neurons differently. The study suggests that a subset of sugar-sensing neurons generate distinct representations of similar sugars, allowing for the rapid assessment of salient features of various sugar rewards and generation of reward-specific behaviors. However, how sensory neurons communicate information about L-arabinose quality and concentration remains unknown. The study explores how animals evaluate salient features of food using an associative-appetitive memory paradigm that approximates food-seeking behavior. The relative appeal of a sugar does not always predict its ability to act as a rewarding stimulus for long-term associative memory, as L-arabinose is more effective than D-arabinose. The authors speculate that certain components of food can reinforce memory relatively independently of the food’s immediate appeal because they indicate specific attributes of the food (nutritional content) that are of long-term relevance. The study also confirms that L-arabinose forms memory, while an L-arabinose-galactose polymer and another natural L sugar, L-rhamnose, do not.
Researchers have found that the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) can rapidly induce slow wave activity in a spatially restricted region of the cortex during low arousal states such as drowsiness and sleep. TRN activation produces a decrease in arousal state, as animals exhibit behavioural changes consistent with this. TRN is a subcortical structure that modulates local cortical slow wave activity, which is important for memory, cognition, and behaviour. Slow waves mark rhythmic periods of suppression in cortical neurons and are associated with behavioural deficits on sub-second timescales. The precise relationship between TRN and cortical activity remains uncertain, but the findings suggest a complex involvement in regulating behavioural arousal.
Researchers have discovered that a protein called suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) five has a major role in the body's ability to resist the effects of influenza A virus. Scientists found that mice without the SOCS5 protein lost a significant amount of weight after being infected with the virus and had an increased viral load in their lungs. SOCS proteins are important for limiting the signals that the immune system produces and are believed to prevent an excessive immune response. The team believes that the discovery may lead to new therapies that can strengthen the body's defences against influenza and reduce the risk of complications arising from the disease.
The T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire is generated throughout an individual's life to combat different pathogens and encodes immunological memory, making it a potential personalized diagnostic tool. However, the diversity of TCRs is influenced by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) polymorphism, which poses challenges for statistical analysis of TCR sequencing data. This study explores the associations between MHC alleles, immune exposures, and shared TCRs using a large human cohort. The analysis reveals the imprint of common pathogens, clusters of co-occurring TCRs that may represent markers of shared immune exposures, and substantial variations in TCR-MHC association strength across MHC loci. The study also identifies significant TCR clusters that may indicate markers of immunological memory and highlights trends in TCR diversity and clonal expansion that illuminate selection processes in cellular immunity. The results lay the groundwork for further explorations into TCR diversity and inform the growing number of studies seeking to identify TCR-based disease diagnostics.
The ability to read jumbled words effortlessly is remarkable, but the neural basis of this ability is poorly understood. The authors hypothesized that viewing a jumbled word activates a visual representation that is compared to known words. To test this hypothesis, they developed a visual model in which neurons tuned to letter shape respond to longer strings in a compositional manner by linearly summing letter responses. The researchers found that dissimilarities between letter strings in this model can explain human performance on visual search and responses to jumbled words in word reading tasks. Brain imaging revealed that viewing a string activates this letter-based code in the lateral occipital (LO) region and that subsequent comparisons to stored words are consistent with activations of the visual word form area (VWFA). Thus, a compositional neural code potentially contributes to effective reading.
The preservation of epigenetic regulators is crucial for maintaining appropriate cellular function, and changes in the chromatin landscape have been linked to aging and various diseases including cancer. Heat shock (HS) has been shown to affect the epigenome, and this study investigated how HS affects the Polycomb group protein (PcG) complex, which is involved in regulating stem cell self-renewal and cellular identity. The study found that PcG proteins accumulate in the nucleolus upon HS and binding to target genes is reduced, coinciding with a loss of specific epigenetic marks. The nucleolus is shown to be an essential protein quality control center that helps to restore the epigenomic landscape after conditions of proteotoxic stress, in an HSP70-dependent manner. The study also confirms the importance of the chromodomain in HS-induced nucleolar localization of CBX proteins. Finally, HS-induced nucleolar accumulation was found to coincide with the accumulation of other chromatin modifiers, and these upregulated proteins were enriched for GO terms related to chromatin modification, gene expression, DNA repair, histone ubiquitination, and protein refolding.
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is a group of proteins that plays a crucial role in gene silencing. It establishes transcriptional repression of specific genes by tri-methylating Lysine 27 of histone H3, a process mediated by cofactors such as AEBP2. Despite its biological importance, little is known about the subunit organization and architecture of PRC2. This study presents the first three-dimensional electron microscopy structure of the human PRC2 complex bound to its cofactor AEBP2, localizing all the PRC2 subunits and their functional domains to generate a detailed map of interactions. The structure reveals an allosteric role of AEBP2 in regulating gene silencing and suggests a molecular mechanism for the chromatin-based regulation of PRC2 activity.
A study investigated the connections between excitation-contraction signaling and glucose metabolism in Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility (MHS) patients. They found that MHS patients have a wide-ranging alteration in glucose metabolism, which probably causes their hyperglycemia. The study identified major changes in the protein endowment of MHS patients' muscles, such as increases in phosphorylated glycogen phosphorylase (GPa), glycogen debranching enzyme (GDE), and their Ca2+-dependent kinase (PhK), as well as decreases in glycogen and glucose transporter GLUT4. The study established MHS as a prodrome of hyperglycemia and a path to diabetes.
The document discusses the regulation of G protein gated inward rectifier K+ (GIRK) channels, which are present in many cell types and modulate K+ conductance near the resting membrane potential. The study focuses on how the mammalian GIRK2 channel is regulated by G proteins, PIP2, and Na+ ions. The study showed that both Gβγ and PIP2 are necessary for GIRK2 channel activation, and that the lipid anchor on the Gβγ subunit is essential for activation. The study also showed that short chain C8-PIP2 activates only one orientation of GIRK2 channels, corresponding to those channels with their physiologically intracellular surface pointed toward the chamber to which PIP2 was added.
A study has identified a microRNA, microRNA-203, as a possible target for skin cancer using a mouse model. The study shows the loss of microRNA-203 promotes selection and expansion of tumour-initiating cells. Furthermore, the study suggests that miRNA-203 plays a tumour-suppressing role in inhibiting selection and expansion of tumour-initiating cells early in tumour development. Among the three Ras genes, Hras is commonly mutated in tumours originated from stratified epithelial tissues including squamous cell carcinoma in the skin, head and neck cancer as well as bladder cancer. As prominent proto-oncogenes, ras mutations have long been recognized to interact with the miRNA pathway.
TRIM33 has been identified as an exception to the rule that most mammalian transcription factors (TFs) and cofactors occupy thousands of genomic sites and modulate the expression of large gene networks to implement their biological functions. In B-cell neoplasms, TRIM33 is associated with a single cis element, and its main function is to interfere with enhancer-mediated Bim activation, playing an essential role in preventing apoptosis in B lymphoblastic leukemia. Although several studies have linked TRIM33 to transcriptional control, a genomewide assessment of TRIM33 occupancy has yet to be performed to define the scope of its regulatory function. B-lymphoid cells are uniquely sensitive to TRIM33 inhibition, and this factor is implicated as a lineage dependency in cancers of B-cell origin.
Researchers have identified a new RNA structure, the thiS motif, that acts as a riboswitch and senses the precursor to a vitamin called thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP). The thiS structure is an unusually small ligand-sensing aptamer fully embedded within a classic intrinsic transcription terminator stem, making it an efficient genetic switch. The new finding could lead to more discoveries of similarly small, yet essential riboswitches, and could also help understand and treat vitamin deficiencies.
Researchers have found that it is possible to generate hair cell marker proteins in the vestibular sensory tissues of humans. This may eventually provide a therapeutic approach to help treat hearing loss and balance dysfunction. Loss of hair cells in the inner ear results in deafness and vertigo, which are damaging conditions that are often underestimated. While there is a limited capacity to regenerate hair cells in the mammalian vestibular system, this research provides hope that it will be possible to induce supporting cells to become hair cells in order to help people recover from these conditions.
The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a key signaling hub regulating protein homeostasis, growth, and proliferation. Arginine, an amino acid essential for early development in mammals, is a key activator of mTORC1. A new study demonstrates that arginine acts independently of its metabolism to activate mTORC1 by preventing TSC2 localization to lysosomes and interaction with its target protein, Rheb. Arginine plays a fundamental role in mTORC1 signaling in human embryonic stem cells and differentiated lineages. Amino acids, including leucine, glutamine, and arginine, are required for mTORC1 activation via different mechanisms. The study suggests that arginine is the most important regulator of mTORC1 activity and highlights the complex signaling interplay between different growth-promoting stimuli in regulating mTORC1 at the level of lysosomes.
Scientists have identified a protein that may have regulated the development of multicellularity in animals, including humans. The protein, named Rosetteless, was found in the choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta, one of the closest living relatives to animals. The protein is essential for the development of rosette colonies in the single-celled organism, which mirrors the transition to multicellularity hypothesised to have preceded the origin of animals. This study provides the first link between genotype and phenotype in choanoflagellates and raises the possibility that a protein with C-type lectin-like domains regulated development in the last common ancestor of choanoflagellates and animals.
This study examines the mechanisms of directional cell migration in sea urchin embryos, focusing on the migration and insertion of pigmented immunocytes. The study found that Sp-Eph signaling is necessary for the insertion of the immunocytes into the ectoderm, and that Sp-Eph and Sp-Efn function in the dispersion of immunocyte precursors. The pigmented immunocytes select a site to insert during their migration from the vegetal plate, and insertion includes a change in immunocyte morphology. The study also notes that vertebrates similarly use Eph/Ephrin signaling to regulate cell migration and that sea urchins are an attractive model for studying such function due to the simple expressions of Sp-Eph and Sp-Efn.
The interplay between social hierarchy status and sex influences behavior and physiology in response to chronic stress in mice. Position in the social hierarchy at baseline is a significant predictor of multiple behavioral outcomes following exposure to chronic stress, with opposite consequences for males and females. Sex differences and social context contribute to the development of stress-related disorders, which exhibit a pronounced gender bias in their prevalence, severity, age-of-onset, and comorbidities. Social dominance plays a decisive role in rodent social groups and an individual’s ranking has important consequences for accessing resources and influencing health, hormonal profile, brain function, metabolism, and mortality. Despite having a similar hierarchical structure, male and female social dominance hierarchies have different relationships to overall behavior. An individual’s standing in the social hierarchy is a predictor of behavior upon stress exposure, and long-term predictions can be made based on pre-existing social dominance status.
The article discusses the evolution of cell cycle regulation in fungi and animals, specifically the conservation of network structure despite significant sequence divergence in many core regulators. The authors hypothesize that the fungal SBF transcription factor was acquired through horizontal gene transfer and hijacked cell cycle control by activating transcription via the cis-regulatory elements targeted by the ancestral cell cycle regulator E2F, much like extant viral oncogenes. The article also presents evidence that the last eukaryotic common ancestor already had a complex repertoire of cell cycle regulatory proteins and that fungal evolution proceeded through a hybrid network before abruptly losing ancestral components in the lineage leading to Dikarya. The article concludes that the shared network topology in budding yeast and animals suggests that this feature is more conserved than the constituent regulatory proteins.
Inflammation in the brain is a driver of weight loss and anorexia in cancer patients, but the cellular sources of neuroinflammation during malignancy are unknown. In a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, the researchers observed robust myeloid cell infiltration into the brain, primarily neutrophils that accumulate at a unique CNS entry portal called the velum interpositum, where they express CCR2. Pharmacologic CCR2 blockade and genetic deletion of Ccr2 both resulted in significantly decreased brain-infiltrating myeloid cells and attenuated cachexia during pancreatic cancer. Lastly, intracerebroventricular blockade of the purinergic receptor P2RX7 during pancreatic cancer abolished immune cell recruitment to the brain and attenuated anorexia. The study demonstrates a novel function for the CCR2/CCL2 axis in recruiting neutrophils to the brain, which drives anorexia and muscle catabolism. The findings reveal a mechanism by which neutrophil and other myeloid cells are recruited to the brain, where they contribute to cachexia symptoms.
A new study has identified a signalling pathway that regulates heme biosynthesis during erythropoiesis in zebrafish, murine, and human models. The research shows that erythropoietin (EPO) signalling, together with the GATA1 transcriptional target, AKAP10, regulates heme biosynthesis during erythropoiesis at the outer mitochondrial membrane. The pathway leads to the direct phosphorylation of the crucial heme biosynthetic enzyme, ferrochelatase (FECH) by protein kinase A (PKA). Inhibiting this pathway results in a block in hemoglobin production, leading to the intracellular accumulation of protoporphyrin intermediates. The study proposes a new model in which the erythroid transcriptional program works in concert with post-translational mechanisms to regulate heme metabolism during development. The findings have implications for the pathogenesis of hematologic diseases, which are often associated with mutations in heme metabolism genes.
The process of nucleation promoting factors (NPFs) in coordinating the regulation of the cellular actin networks is poorly understood. However, it has been observed that many cellular processes require tight control of the assembly and disassembly of actin filament networks. Actin-related protein (Arp)-2/3 complex is an important actin cytoskeletal regulator that mediates the assembly of branched actin filament networks by nucleating new filaments from the sides of pre-existing filaments. NPFs discovered to date bind either actin monomers or filaments. Cortactin is a prototypical type II NPF that activates Arp2/3 complex weakly on its own, but with WASP/N-WASP, another class of NPFs, activates potently. The authors of this study dissect the mechanism of synergy and propose a model in which cortactin displaces N-WASP from nascent branches as a prerequisite for nucleation. Their results provide a molecular basis for coordinate Arp2/3 complex regulation.
The TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion is common in prostate cancers and its function is poorly understood. Researchers have identified the arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as a gene that interacts with ERG, and that attenuates AR recruitment and transcription of genes expressed in differentiated prostate epithelium. The AR-inhibitory function of PRMT5 is restricted to TMPRSS2:ERG-positive prostate cancer cells, which provides a rationale for targeting PRMT5 in these types of cancer. Furthermore, methylation of AR at arginine 761 highlights a mechanism for how the ERG oncogene may coax AR towards inducing proliferation versus differentiation. The study provides new insights into how ERG and PRMT5 contribute to prostate cancer growth, and suggests a potential therapeutic target for patients with TMPRSS2:ERG-positive prostate cancers.
Cell-to-cell viral infection, where viruses spread by contact from infected cells to uninfected cells, is considered a critical mode of virus infection but the quantitative information that underlies cell-to-cell infection and its impact on virus spread has yet to be elucidated. In this study, the authors quantitatively analysed the dynamics of cell-to-cell and cell-free human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infections through experimental-mathematical investigation. Their analyses demonstrated that cell-to-cell infection accounts for approximately 60% of viral infection, shortens the generation time of viruses by 0.9 times, and increases the viral fitness by 3.9 times. The results suggest that even a complete block of cell-free infection would provide only a limited impact on HIV-1 spread.
Cross-synaptic synchrony plays a key role in the transmission of signals and noise through neural circuits. In the mammalian retina, neighboring A17 amacrine cells often receive input from the same rod bipolar cells, providing an opportunity to measure cross-synaptic synchrony under physiological conditions. It was found that the synchronization of rod bipolar cell synapses is near-perfect in the dark, minimizing intrinsic synaptic noise and allowing for faithful transmission of signals to downstream neurons. However, the desynchronization in steady light lowers the sensitivity of the output to upstream voltage fluctuations. The study also highlights the importance of understanding the sources of noise in neural signals and how they are controlled, particularly in sensory systems that must encode stimuli accurately despite stochastic processes.
Gamma frequency oscillations in the brain promote the formation of long-lasting synaptic plasticity in a cell-specific manner, according to research from the University of Bristol. Researchers used brain scans from live mice and in-vitro models to study the impact of gamma rhythms on activity-dependent modification of synaptic strength. They found such rhythms led to enhanced excitatory synaptic strength in pyramidal cells that was metabotropic glutamate receptor-5-dependent, and increased specific types of inhibitory synaptic strength in a directionally biased and cell type-specific manner.

The α4βδ GABAA receptor (GABAR) is an inhibitory receptor that first appears on dendritic spines in female mice at puberty, but its role in the process of adolescent synaptic pruning is unknown. In this study, it was found that the α4βδ GABAR triggers adolescent pruning, reducing spine density in the CA1 hippocampus by half in female wild-type mice but not in α4 KO mice. This effect was associated with decreased expression of kalirin-7, a spine protein which controls actin cytoskeleton remodeling. The absence of α4βδ-mediated inhibition prevented pruning and impaired spatial learning in female mice. The study suggests that α4βδ GABARs are necessary for pubertal pruning, and that impairment of NMDAR activation regulates the process of pruning. Spine density decreased by half in widespread areas of the CNS during the pubertal period, including the CA1 hippocampus and temporal lobe, sites essential for learning and memory.
Researchers have developed new imaging tools to measure protein movement and interactions within multicellular organisms. The tools, which include Fluorescent Correlation Spectroscopy, allow researchers to analyze quantitative information about signalling factors in organism development, such as the intercellular movement of transcription factors in plants to regulate cell fate specification. Using Arabidopsis development as an example, the team measured the parameters of protein movement and integration, including SHR mobility and association with SCR. They then incorporated the data into a mathematical model to help understand how protein movement and protein-protein stoichiometry contribute to development.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle in higher eukaryotes that consists of a network of tubules and sheets that change during differentiation and the cell cycle. The formation of the ER network involves Reticulons (Rtns) proteins, the membrane-fusing GTPase Atlastin (ATL), and the Lunapark protein (Lnp). This article looks at how these proteins work together to maintain ER morphology. The study found that ATL is not only required to form the ER network but is also needed to maintain it. The study also suggests that Lnp is not essential for network formation, but its inactivation or absence causes the loss of three-way junctions and tubules in favour of sheets. The study uses stably expressed cell lines and live-cell imaging to examine ER morphology changes.
The influence of biomechanics on the tempo and mode of morphological evolution is fundamental to organismal diversification. A study was conducted on multiple four-bar linkage systems in animals to examine the association between mechanical sensitivity and morphological evolution. The findings demonstrate that rapid morphological evolution is associated with mechanical sensitivity. Mechanical sensitivity is mostly explained by size, whereby the smallest link(s) are disproportionately affected by length changes and most strongly influence mechanical output. The rate of evolutionary change is greatest in the smallest links, and trait shifts across phylogeny occur only via influential, small links. The study highlights how biomechanics can influence morphological evolution, and its findings may enrich our understanding of the processes shaping diversification.
Y box-binding protein 1 (Ybx1) plays a crucial role in the regulation of Nodal signaling, which is essential for pattern formation, growth, differentiation, and maintenance of stem cell pluripotency. Using proteomic screening, Ybx1 was identified as the factor responsible for preventing premature translation and Nodal signaling using the maternal sqt/nodal RNA of zebrafish. Ybx1 binds the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of sqt RNA, which leads to the prevention of ectopic Nodal activity. Implanted Nodal-coated beads result in gastrulation failure and embryonic lethality, similar to ybx1 mutations in zebrafish. The findings highlight the critical role played by maternal factors in regulating growth factor signaling and cell-type specification and identify a new mode of regulation of Nodal signaling that is likely to be conserved.
Defective epithelial extrusion, the process of eliminating overcrowded epithelial cells by squeezing them out of the tissue, can contribute to carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Tumors or epithelia lacking the protein S1P2 cannot extrude cells apically and instead form apoptotic-resistant masses, possess poor barrier function, and shift extrusion basally beneath the epithelium, providing a potential mechanism for cell invasion. Disrupting S1P-S1P2 signaling reduces apoptosis and causes epithelial masses. Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinomas (PDACs) have little to no S1P2, which could explain why these tumors are typically more invasive and chemo-resistant. Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) inhibitors could target these tumors without affecting wild-type tissue.
Mechanical force and Wnt signaling work together to activate β-catenin-mediated transcription and cell division. Mechanical strain induces Src-dependent phosphorylation of Y654 β-catenin, and increases β-catenin-mediated transcription, leading to accumulation of cells in S/G2. Activating β-catenin by inhibiting Casein Kinase I or adding Wnt3A increases β-catenin-mediated transcription and strain-induced accumulation of cells in S/G2. The combination of mechanical strain and Wnt/β-catenin activation triggers cells in S/G2 to divide. Mechanical cues are critical in developing and adult tissues. Cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesions regulate the response of multicellular tissues to externally applied strain. β-Catenin transcriptional activation downstream of mechanical force or Wnt stimulation has been studied separately, it remains unknown whether β-catenin’s role as a target of mechanical force is independent, redundant or synergistic to Wnt signaling in tissue homeostasis.
Researchers at Michigan State University have studied a strain of Escherichia coli bacteria that developed the ability to feed off citrate, a molecule they can't normally process, over the course of 30 years in their laboratory environment, and found that the adaptations that enabled the E. coli strains to metabolise citrate are a combination of stepping stones that also caused significant negative side-effects. As study co-author Richard Lenski explained, the work is significant for highlighting the “importance of history and chance for innovation [that] is often under-appreciated.”
A study on Heliconius butterflies has found that a gene called cortex plays a crucial role in determining the colour and structure of the scales on their wings. This gene regulates a switch between different types of scale cells and controls scale cell identity. Chromatin accessibility profiling and introgression scans identified regions associated with discrete phenotypic switches, while CRISPR perturbation of these regions in black hindwing genotypes recreated a yellow bar, demonstrating their spatially limited activity. The study also found that cortex is one of four major effect genes controlling wing pattern and has been repeatedly targeted by natural selection to drive differences in pigmentation. Cortex is an insect-specific gene that shows rapid sequence evolution and has acquired novel expression domains that correlate with melanic wing patterns in Heliconius. The researchers used a variety of techniques including RNA sequencing, ATAC sequencing, in situ hybridisation, and antibody staining, to determine the role of cortex in pattern variation in Heliconius butterflies.
Malaria elimination programs have historically focused on universal interventions but as countries approach elimination, targeted interventions are required. To properly guide the final stages of malaria elimination, new quantitative methods and practical operational advice are required to identify areas where transmission continues. A study using routine national surveillance data from Swaziland estimated individual reproductive numbers based on computational methods for assessing malaria transmission. Fine-grained maps of reproductive numbers and local malaria importation rates were combined to show ‘malariogenic potential’, a first for malaria elimination. As countries approach elimination, these individual-based measures of transmission risk provide meaningful metrics for planning programmatic responses and prioritizing areas where interventions will contribute most to malaria elimination.
Phasic responses of brainstem arousal systems are a significant source of variability in decision-making, according to research in humans conducted by a consortium of scientists from Germany and the Netherlands. Studying pupil responses during sensory-motor decisions, the group showed that large pupil responses generally predicted a reduction in decision bias, which was accompanied by a modulation of choice-encoding pattern signals in parietal and prefrontal cortex, and predicted by phasic, pupil-linked responses of a number of neuromodulatory brainstem centres involved in the control of cortical arousal state, including the noradrenergic locus coeruleus. The intra-decisional arousal boost appears to interact with the decision computation.
The optoclamp is a feedback control technology that enables continuous, real-time adjustments of bidirectional optical stimulation in order to lock spiking activity at specified targets over timescales ranging from seconds to days. It provides continuous, precise optical control of firing in neuronal populations in order to disentangle causally related variables of circuit activation in a physiologically and ethologically relevant manner. It allows for the decoupling of neuronal firing levels from ongoing changes in network excitability due to neurotransmission blockade in vitro as well as impinging vibrissal sensory drive in vivo. Optoclamp is an effective general tool for decoupling neural firing from other variables that would normally affect network excitability.
The role of the gradient of the protein Decapentaplegic (Dpp) in regulating tissue size and growth in the Drosophila wing has been debated. This study used RNAi to deplete Dpp and study its spatial and temporal requirement in promoting growth. The results showed that Dpp from the anterior-posterior (AP) boundary is required throughout development to promote growth by regulating cell proliferation and tissue size, and that reduced levels of Dpp affect both the width and length of the resulting wing. The study supports the theory that graded activity of Dpp is not necessary for wing growth and that the range of Dpp spreading from the AP compartment boundary can regulate the final size of the wing appendage.
The article discusses the process of protein folding homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which relies on efficient protein thiol oxidation as well as a parallel reductive process to edit disulfides during the maturation or degradation of secreted proteins. The widely-held assumption that reduced ER glutathione fuels disulfide reduction is challenged by experiments involving the expression of a modified form of a cytosolic glutathione-degrading enzyme, ChaC1, which purged the ER of glutathione but had no effect on disulfide editing-dependent maturation or misfolded protein degradation. The article suggests that alternative electron donors maintain the reductive capacity of the ER instead of reduced ER glutathione.
HMMR (Hyaluronan-Mediated Motility Receptor) plays an essential role in orienting progenitor cell division and supporting neural development in the brain. A new study shows that HMMR acts at centrosomes in a PLK1-dependent pathway that modulates the cortical localization of NuMA-dynein complexes to correct mispositioned spindles. HMMR is necessary for oriented NP (neuroepithelial progenitor) cell division and nervous system development, and its absence results in defects in overall brain structure and size, microcephaly or megalencephaly, and reduced production of intermediate progenitor cells. HMMR is also needed for neonatal survival, as HMMR knockout mice suffer neonatal lethality with defective neural development and pleiotropic phenotypes in multiple tissues. The study further shows that the centrosome targeting domain is critical to HMMR function in spindle positioning, with the bZip domain (amino acids 624-679) an essential domain for the orientation of cell division.
Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are non-coding RNA molecules involved in directing chemical modifications in RNA, particularly in ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Altered snoRNA expression has been observed in various cancers, but their role in cellular transformation remains poorly understood. This study found that specific subsets of snoRNAs are differentially regulated during the early cellular response to oncogenic RAS expression. Loss of one specific snoRNA, SNORA24, was found to promote the development of liver cancer that closely resembled human steatohepatitic hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Human HCCs with low SNORA24 expression also displayed increased lipid content and were associated with poor patient survival. The study also found that ribosomes lacking SNORA24-guided pseudouridine modifications exhibited alterations in biophysical properties, which affected aminoacyl-transfer RNA selection, and altered pre-translocation ribosome complex dynamics. These findings highlight the role of specific snoRNAs in safeguarding against oncogenic insult and provide evidence for a link between snoRNAs regulated by RAS and the biophysical properties of ribosomes in cancer.
A new study has found that codon composition affects mRNA stability and gene expression in human cells. The research was conducted in four different human cell lines using three independent methods to measure mRNA stability. The results indicate that the regulatory information affecting mRNA stability is encoded in codons, and not in nucleotides, and that stabilizing codons tend to be associated with higher tRNA levels and higher charged/total tRNA ratios. Meanwhile, destabilizing codons tend to possess shorter poly (A) tails, although the poly (A) tail is not required for the codon-mediated mRNA stability. The researchers found that the codon-mediated effect on gene expression can also be modulated by tuning the translational level (number of ribosomes on mRNA) and that the number of ribosome loads into an mRNA modulates the codon-mediated effects on gene expression. The study provides definitive evidence that translation strongly affects mRNA stability in a codon-dependent manner in human cells.
A study explored the association between protein-truncating variants (PTVs) and human healthspan and lifespan. The study found that the burden of rarest PTVs negatively affects healthspan and lifespan in humans, accounting for a small fraction of their variability. Studies on common gene variants could not explain much of the lifespan heritability in humans. Rare PTVs emerged as a novel genetic component with profound effects on complex traits and fitness. However, somatic accumulation of PTVs was unlikely to be causal in aging. The study found that rare damaging mutations, both inherited and accumulated throughout life, contribute to the aging process, and that burden of ultra-rare variants in combination with common alleles better explains the apparent heritability of human lifespan. The study also found sex-specific effects for lifespan phenotypes.
Proteins clustering into micrometer-sized structures at membranes is observed in many signaling pathways. Most models of clustering are specific to particular systems, and relationships between physical properties of the clusters and their molecular components are not well understood. This study reports biochemical reconstitution on supported lipid bilayers of protein clusters containing the adhesion receptor Nephrin and its cytoplasmic partners, Nck and N-WASP, and demonstrates that multivalent interactions enable these proteins to polymerize on the membrane surface and undergo two-dimensional phase separation, producing micrometer-sized clusters. The study suggests that interactions between multivalent proteins could be a general mechanism for cytoplasmic adaptor proteins to organize membrane receptors into micrometer-scale signaling zones.
Transposable elements (TEs), also known as genomic parasites, are mobile genetic elements that can copy and transpose themselves into new locations in the genome. They are generally considered deleterious to the host organism, as they can disrupt genes and other functional elements, and mediate harmful chromosomal rearrangements. However, TEs are present in appreciable and highly variable proportions of euchromatic genomes in all eukaryotes surveyed. This paper provides the first genome-wide quantification of the epigenetic impacts of euchromatic TEs in Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila simulans, and shows that the spread of repressive epigenetic marks to nearby DNA occurs at over 50% of euchromatic TEs, and can extend up to 20 kb. This results in differential epigenetic states of genic alleles and, in turn, selection against TEs. Interestingly, the lower TE content in D. simulans compared to D. melanogaster correlates with stronger epigenetic effects of TEs and higher levels of host genetic factors promoting epigenetic silencing. The paper concludes that the epigenetic effects of euchromatic TEs, and host genetic factors modulating these effects, play a critical role in the evolution of TEs both within and between species.
The Multiscale Graph Correlation (MGC) is an approach to discovering and deciphering dependencies across disparate data modalities or properties that can be applied to understand relationships between different properties of data, such as whether a genome or connectome has information about disease status. MGC is a dependence test that combines different data science techniques and provides results that are interpretable, and unique in characterizing the latent geometry underlying the relationship. MGC tests outperform other approaches, and demonstrate almost dominance in high-dimensional non-monotonic relationships that are common in biomedicine where they half the time and cost of experiments designed to discover relationships at a given effect size. Furthermore, the MGC-Map partially characterizes the geometry of relationships, differentiating different dependence structures and assisting subsequent analysis steps. The MGC approach is similar to regularized or sparsified variant of distance or kernel methods and learning a metric. Energy statistics provide state of the art approaches to other problems, including goodness-of-fit, analysis of variance, and feature selection, so MGC can be adapted for them as well. MGC opens the door to applications, such as classification, regression, or dimensionality reduction by providing guidance as to how to proceed.
The small protein secretoglobin (SCGB) 3A2 is predominantly secreted in airways and found to suppress lung inflammation and fibrosis. A recent study revealed that SCGB3A2 chaperones LPS to the cytosol and leads to pyroptotic cell death driven by caspase-11. SCGB3A2 and LPS co-treatment significantly induced pyroptosis of innate immune cells and decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro. SCGB3A2 treatment resulted in reduced progression of xenograft tumors in mice. SCGB3A2 has an LPS delivery vehicle function and SCGB3A2 bounds to SDC1, a receptor on the cell surface. The growth of LLC cells was strongly inhibited by small amounts of LPS. SCGB3A2 enhanced LPS's ability to reduce cancer cell proliferation and its ability to suppress LLC cells growth. Finally, SCGB3A2 tends to form oligomers in vitro, which can bind to both LPS and SDC1.
The tumor suppressor gene PTEN is involved in a variety of cellular processes, including the regulation of epithelial morphogenesis. In mouse embryos lacking PTEN, the neural plate fails to transform into a columnar pseudostratified epithelium, resulting in defects in neural morphogenesis and failure to form a neural tube. Although PTEN is known to regulate proliferation and apoptosis through the PI3 kinase pathway, the neural plate phenotype is not caused by changes in these processes. High-resolution imaging indicates that PTEN is required for stable planar cell packing and formation of stable apical-basal microtubule arrays. These findings shed light on the role of PTEN in developmental disorders such as Cowden and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes, as well as in tumors that lack PTEN.
Researchers have used computer simulations and quantitative tools to gain a better understanding of heart looping and the role played by different factors, in particular the breakdown of the dorsal mesocardium. The study highlights a novel model of heart looping through which left-right asymmetries at fixed heart poles generate opposite deformations as the heart tube grows between fixed poles, leading to a helical shape. The research also provides insight into the process of heart development in the mouse embryo, which is not strictly synchronous with somitogenesis. The study is relevant to congenital heart defects and will determine the prognosis of patients.
The paper investigates the mechanism of transcriptional bursting in live cells, which refers to the discontinuous occurrence of gene transcription in irregular bursts or pulses of activity, interspersed by periods of inactivity. Previous models have used RNA hybridisation studies, but the authors use a combination of quantitative imaging of actin gene transcription, molecular genetics, stochastic simulation and probabilistic modelling. They found that a continuum of transcriptional states, with slowly fluctuating initiation rates, describes experimental data more accurately than earlier models based on a binary off/on model or discrete levels of activity. The dynamics of transcription regulation affects the variance in output from cells and can be modulated by extracellular signals, cell properties such as volume and cell cycle stage, indicating that transcriptional bursting is responsive to the demands of the cell. The authors also investigated how the processes of transcription elongation and initiation contribute to the transitions of the gene over this spectrum of activity states. They used a Monte Carlo simulation framework to construct a probabilistic model and found that the average pulse duration depends strongly on the initiation rate but also substantially sensitive to the detection threshold and frame interval specified in the simulations. The pulse duration distribution had exponential distributions at long timescales but deviations at very short timescales. The authors conclude that a continuum or spectrum of gene states potentially enables a wide dynamic range for cell responses to stimuli.
Nuclear speckles (NS) are membraneless nuclear bodies that contain high concentrations of RNA-processing and some transcription factors. The monoclonal antibody SC35 is often used to mark NS; however, the main target of SC35 has been mischaracterized, and research on the function of NS is virtually restricted to colocalization analyses. This study shows that the main target of SC35 mAb is likely SRRM2, a spliceosome-associated protein that sharply localizes to NS. The core of NS is likely formed by SON and SRRM2, and this work paves the way to study the role of NS under diverse physiological and stress conditions.
The ellipsoid body (EB) in the brain of a fruit fly is a substructure that plays a central role in sensory integration and motor coordination, and contains circumferentially laminated ring (R) neurons. The laminae formation of these R neurons, and how it affects their function, has been unclear. However, a recent study has shown that early developing EB neurons play a key role in regulating EB laminae formation, and that transmembrane proteins semaphorin-1a (Sema-1a) and plexin A work together to regulate the formation of R axon lamination. Results show that Sema-1a-dependent R axon lamination prevents the spread of synaptic inhibition between adjacent EB lamina. This demonstrates that the lamination of the EB is critical for local pre-synaptic inhibitory circuit organisation.
Researchers have revealed the workings of a specific enzyme that plays a key role in enabling cells to divide. The AAA ATPase Vps4 dismantles polymers known as ESCRT-III to facilitate the membrane fission required for cytokinetic abscission, formation of multivesicular bodies and exosomes, viral shedding and removal of defective nuclear pore complexes, among other activities. Researchers from the University of California, San Francisco used a 4.3 Å-resolution cryo-EM structure to image the VPS4 hexamer, which has a key role in ESCRT pathways, along with its cofactor VTA1, ADP-BeFx and an ESCRT-III substrate peptide.

The CMG helicase separates DNA strands during replication in eukaryotes, but how it is assembled and engages DNA substrates remains unclear. Using electron microscopy, the structure of the CMG in the presence of ATPγS and a DNA duplex bearing a 3′ single-stranded tail was determined. The structure showed that the MCM subunits of the CMG bind preferentially to single-stranded DNA, establishes the polarity by which DNA enters into the Mcm2-7 pore, and explains how Cdc45 helps prevent DNA from dissociating from the helicase. The Mcm2-7 subcomplex forms a cracked-ring, right-handed spiral when DNA and nucleotide are bound. The existence of a subpopulation of dimeric CMGs establishes the subunit register of Mcm2-7 double hexamers and together with the spiral form highlights how Mcm2-7 transitions through different conformational and assembly states as it matures into a functional helicase.
The article documents a collection of 7434 MiMIC insertions, which are efficient gene traps used for intronic insertions. They have inserted tags in the coding introns of 2854 genes, which has allowed the library to create a collection of 400 GFP-tagged genes. Their research shows that 72% of the internally tagged proteins are functional, and over 90% can be imaged without being fixed. MiMIC is highly mutagenic, and is an extremely efficient tool for gene/protein tagging, which can be used to create novel tagged genes/proteins that alternative methods might have missed. The methods used will allow for researchers to address important biological questions, particularly in adult flies, using RNA and protein knockdown techniques. The methods used in this study will allow researchers to manipulate as many genes as possible.
DPP9, a serine aminopeptidase, is a negative regulator of the tyrosine kinase Syk, which is involved in B-cell signaling. DPP9 cleaves Syk to produce a neo N-terminus with serine in position 1, and DPP9 silencing reduces Cbl interaction with Syk, suggesting that DPP9 processing is a prerequisite for Syk ubiquitination. DPP9 interacts with Filamin A, which recruits DPP9 to Syk. FLNA acts as a recruiting factor linking DPP9 to Syk, resulting in cleavage of the Syk N-terminus by DPP9, affecting Syk stability and Syk-dependent signal transduction. The interaction between DPP9 and FLNA requires FLNA repeat 5 and is readily detected in cells. The interaction of DPP9 with the peptide corresponding to Syk N-terminus requires the first two residues in Syk N-terminus.
The study investigates how reward-related visual information is relayed to dopamine neurons in the midbrain. The researchers used Pavlovian conditioning in macaque monkeys with unilateral primary visual cortex lesions to investigate visual cues' ability to elicit anticipatory licking for juice drops. Subsequent pharmacological inactivation of the superior colliculus (SC) suppressed the anticipatory licking. Concurrent single-unit recordings indicated that dopamine neuron responses reflecting the reward expectation could be recorded even in the absence of V1, and that these responses were also suppressed by SC inactivation. The results suggest that the subcortical visual circuit can relay reward-predicting visual information to dopamine neurons and that the integrity of the SC is necessary for visually-elicited Pavlovian responses after V1 lesion.
Co-administering transmission-blocking vaccines (TBV) alongside anti-malarial pre-erythrocytic vaccines (PEV) can enhance PEV efficacy, according to researchers at the Malaria Atlas Project. The combination was tested using murine populations with a shared transmission history of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. TBV was found to reduce parasite density in mosquito salivary glands, improving the efficacy of PEV, which has been noted as being only partially protective. The study's authors predict that their proposed method could accelerate malaria elimination, circumventing the limitations of each vaccine class when used separately. The use of vaccines, rather than insecticides and treatment with antimalarials, offers a low-cost, potentially transformative intervention in the fight against malaria.
The document describes a study on the Chd1 protein, which is a member of a family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling proteins that regulate protein-DNA interactions. The study presents the structure of Chd1 engaged with nucleosomes in the presence of the transition state mimic ADP-beryllium fluoride, and shows how changes to nucleosome structure can alter the way in which histone epitopes are presented. The study also explores the interplay between Chd1 and histone modifications observed in coding region chromatin. The nucleosome particles exhibited a preferred orientation, which limits the resolution but still provides the framework necessary for understanding the interplay between DNA, histone proteins and protein-DNA interactions.
Malaria transmission is spatially heterogeneous and can reduce the effectiveness of control strategies. However, targeting ‘hotspots’ of transmission can be highly effective in controlling the spread of the disease. In a study conducted in coastal Kenya, researchers analysed the spatial heterogeneity of malaria cases in order to determine the temporal and spatial scales of case clustering, so that targeting these areas can inform malaria control programmes. The study found that the incidence of febrile malaria presenting to health care is biased by access to care, but could be countered by using the malaria positive fraction (MPF) among children with fever. Hotspots of febrile malaria were identified at every scale, and the researchers found hotspots within hotspots, down to the level of an individual homestead. Febrile malaria hotspots were temporally unstable, but 4 km radius hotspots could be targeted for 1 month following 1 month periods of surveillance. The results showed that targeting hotspots for control could be an effective strategy to combat the disease.
Air pollution is a major environmental health risk that affects countries worldwide, with outdoor and indoor air pollution recently classified as a Group 1 carcinogen in humans. Xuanwei City in China has high incidences of lung cancer due to smoky coal combustion-generated pollution containing high concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are also key carcinogens in tobacco smoke. The abnormal inflammatory factor CXCL13 was found to be overexpressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients from Xuanwei and control regions where smoky coal was not used, with CXCL13 expression associated with the region Xuanwei and cigarette smoke. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), a key carcinogen in PAHs, induced CXCL13 production in lung epithelial cells and in mice prior to development of detectable lung cancer, demonstrating CXCL13's critical role in PAH-induced lung carcinogenesis. CXCL13 was also found to be elevated in tumor tissues from 63/70 (90%) of Xuanwei NSCLC patients and 44/71 (62%) of smoker and 27/60 (45%) of non-smoker control region patients. Further analysis also found CXCL13 expression to be elevated in the blood of NSCLC patients. These findings provide insights into PAH-related carcinogenesis and may provide novel therapeutic targets for lung cancer.
This study investigates how visual stimuli are detected in populations of neurons in the primary sensory cortex. The researchers found that visual detection is correlated with population response heterogeneity, rather than overall response strength. They also found that neuronal populations show consistencies in activation patterns across temporally spaced trials in association with hit responses, but not during nondetections. The study suggests that detection depends on transient differentiation in neuronal activity within cortical populations.
Researchers have discovered that during the formation of the embryonic vasculature, the migration of the angioblasts, which form the first axial vessels, to the position of the future vessels is mainly triggered by the recently discovered ligand Elabela (Ela) and its signaling through Apelin receptors (Aplr, APJ), rather than by Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF-A), as previously thought. The study shows that angioblasts rely on their intrinsic expression of Apelin receptors for their migration to the midline to form the large axial vessels, the dorsal aorta (DA) and the cardinal vein (CV). The findings provide a novel mechanism for regulating vasculogenesis, with direct relevance to physiological and pathological angiogenesis.
Researchers have discovered a periodic sub-membrane lattice structure made up of actin, spectrin and other molecules in axons of mammalian neurons, which preferentially forms in axons and not dendrites. This lattice structure plays a key role in maintaining the mechanical stability of axons and the organisation of the axonal membrane. Little is known about how it develops and why it forms only in axons, so researchers set out to study the developmental mechanism of the lattice structure. They found that the structure emerged early during axon development and propagated from proximal regions to distal ends of axons, and depended on intact microtubules. Components of the axon initial segment were recruited to the lattice late during development. Formation of the lattice was regulated by the local concentration of βII spectrin, which is higher in axons than in dendrites, and ankyrin B was critical for the polarised distribution of βII spectrin in neurites. Researchers also discovered a highly regular, periodic membrane skeleton structure in dendrites and axons in mice lacking ankyrin B.
The nuclear periphery and its role in circadian regulation have not been extensively studied; however, recent research shows that these two global regulatory systems play an important role in many bodily functions, so they may be connected. This study investigated the possibility that the nuclear periphery and the circadian clock pathways are linked. The results showed that the nuclear envelope protein MAN1 positively modulates the transcription of the core clock component BMAL1. Moreover, the nuclear envelope components LBR and LMNB1 also appear to play a role in modulating the circadian clock. The study concludes that a novel connection exists between the nuclear periphery and circadian rhythmicity, bridging two global regulatory systems that modulate all aspects of bodily functions.
A study by researchers at Harvard Medical School has shown that the desire for the sugar in food activates a different part of the brain than the taste for sweetness, and that it fine-tuned by the body as a way of regulating nutrient intake. Research conducted on mice showed that the preference for natural sugar in the form of glucose was linked to the consumption of sucrose, whereas drinks sweetened with artificial sugar were treated as something different altogether by the brain. The study also found that over the past decade the sugar industry funded research that played down concerns about sugar and obesity while shifting the blame, falsely, onto saturated fat.
Actin, a protein that forms dynamic filaments in eukaryotic cells, plays a crucial role during the life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular parasite that infects over two billion people worldwide. Actin is important during the parasite's lytic cycle, beginning with host cell invasion and ending with egress and lysis of the host cell. Previous studies have shown that actin is essential for maintenance of the apicoplast, dense granule motility, and host cell egress. A study published in eLife suggests that actin is also important for the formation of the residual body, the organization of parasites within the parasitophorous vacuole, and the intravacuolar network. The study used a modified version of the commercially available actin-chromobody to visualize F-actin dynamics in T. gondii. The tool revealed that actin plays a key role in connecting parasites within the parasitophorous vacuole and allows for vesicles to be exchanged between parasites. The data identify new roles for actin in the intracellular phase of the parasite's lytic cycle and provide a robust new tool for imaging parasitic F-actin dynamics.
The study tested the roles of different neuron groups in the generation and coordination of respiratory output, specifically the Atoh1-, Phox2b-, and Dbx1- derived neurons. It found that Dbx1-derived neurons are necessary for all respiratory behaviors, whereas independent but coupled respiratory rhythms persist from at least three different motor pools after eliminating or silencing Phox2b- or Atoh1-expressing hindbrain neurons. The Atoh1 neurons were found to tune the sequential activation of independent oscillators essential for the fine control of different muscles during breathing. The study showed that different populations of neurons independently control two fundamental aspects of motor behavior: rhythm generation and the relative timing between motor pools.
A study explores the process of cardiac cell diversification in the Drosophila heart, focusing on the two major cardioblast subpopulations: generic working myocardial cells and inflow valve-forming ostial cardioblasts. Several genes involved in cardiac patterning were identified, including unexpected specific requirement of EGF signaling for the specification of generic cardioblasts and a subset of pericardial cells. A regulatory model linking MAPK signaling, Pnt activity, and the cell-type-specific expression patterns of key cardiac transcription factors is proposed. Mutations in genes involved in RTK/Ras/MAPK signaling were also found to affect cardioblast subtype numbers.
Pericentrin (PCNT) is a protein involved in the formation of the bipolar spindle that separates chromosomes during mitosis. The mechanisms behind the delivery of PCNT to the centrosome during centrosome maturation are not fully understood. Researchers found that in cultured human cells and zebrafish embryos, PCNT mRNA is enriched at the centrosome during early mitosis, and this mRNA undergoes active translation. This translation can result in two PCNT polypeptides being translated from the same mRNA at the same time. The active translation is dependent on cytoplasmic dynein, polysomes, and microtubules. The findings suggest a co-translational protein targeting mechanism widely employed by the cell to transport cytoplasmic proteins to specific subcellular compartments and organelles.
A few weeks of growth hormone (GH) treatment during development can impact the lifespan of mice, according to a study published in eLife. Researchers examined how the relatively brief period of GH treatment on long-lived Ames dwarf and normal littermates affected metabolism, and found that a short amount of GH treatment during early development resulted in persistent phenotypic, metabolic, and molecular changes that affected late adult life. The research links the early growth status and nutrient signals to the development of diseases, which have implications for humans born or conceived in under-nourished or over-nourished conditions. The authors note that mechanisms involving hormonal signals are a key determinant of mammalian longevity, and the role of the somatotropic axis (GH-IGF1 axis) in controlling ageing is particularly well documented.

The Lon AAA+ protease is a protein that breaks down damaged or unfolded proteins in a cell. The N-terminal domain (NTD) of the protein is responsible for recognizing and discriminating between these different types of proteins. The NTD selectively interacts with unfolded proteins and protein aggregates, as well as native proteins with specific recognition elements called degrons. The NTD does not play a role in mediating degradation of intrinsically disordered proteins. The NTD is attached to the hexameric LonA chamber by a flexible linker, allowing it to tumble independently of the chamber. The NTD enables LonA to perform protein quality control and selectively degrade damaged or unfolded protein species, and multiple NTD interactions mediate substrate discrimination and selective degradation by LonA.
This article focuses on the role of mobile genetic elements in bacterial evolution, specifically integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs). Researchers have identified a gene in one ICE, ICEBs1, that provides a selective advantage to host cells during biofilm formation and sporulation. The gene, devI, inhibits the expression of biofilm-associated genes and delays sporulation, allowing ICEBs1-containing cells to exploit their neighbors and grow more prior to development. Mobile genetic elements, including ICEs, often carry "cargo" genes that confer a phenotype to host cells, such as antibiotic resistance, metabolic pathways, pathogenesis, and symbiosis determinants. However, maintaining and transferring mobile genetic elements requires host cellular resources and can be lethal. Therefore, balancing the costs and benefits to the host is necessary for the maintenance and transfer of these elements. ICEBs1 is activated during biofilm growth and transfers efficiently, generating a large number of new ICEBs1-containing host cells. The study found that the presence of ICEBs1 provided a frequency-dependent selective advantage during growth in biofilms and sporulation, even when conjugative DNA transfer was blocked. These results suggest that manipulation of host pathways may be a common function of many cargo genes in ICEs.
Researchers have introduced an automatic approach using computer vision to extract phenotypic information from non-clinical photographs in order to model human facial dysmorphisms in a multidimensional "Clinical Face Phenotype Space", which locates patients in the context of known syndromes and thereby facilitates the generation of diagnostic hypotheses. This approach will aid clinicians by narrowing down the search space of potential diagnoses for patients with suspected developmental disorders, and allows the clustering of patients by phenotype aiding disease identification, even when no known syndrome diagnosis exists. The tool helps in the identification of multiple unrelated individuals with the disorder whose genomes harbor deleterious alleles in a shared gene or pathway, which can lead to developing treatments and therapies for specific genetic disorders.
The article presents a method called QuantEv for analyzing and visualizing the spatial distribution of intracellular events from different conditions. The approach involves computing 3D histograms of descriptors in a cylindrical coordinate system and obtaining densities via adaptive kernel density estimation. The Earth Mover's Distance and the Circular Earth Mover's Distance are used to measure the dissimilarity between densities associated with different experimental conditions. The method is applied to study the spatio-temporal distribution of moving Rab6 fluorescently labeled membranes with respect to their direction of movement in crossbow- and disk-shaped cells and the position of the generating hub of Rab11-positive membranes. The results demonstrate that Rab6-positive membranes move predominantly and directly from the Golgi to the cell periphery until they enter a docking phase, after which they move back towards the cell center by following long and indirect trajectories. Rab11-positive membranes are uniformly distributed around the ERC position at the membrane plane regardless of the cell shape.
Swarming animals exhibit striking behavioral plasticity of different types, but the underlying neural mechanisms are not properly understood. Swarming locusts are a model organism for this, therefore, researchers have studied their behavior to understand the molecular mechanisms behind it. They found that neuropeptide F (NPF) and nitric oxide (NO) play a critical role in the locomotor plasticity of swarming migratory locusts. Their findings uncover a hierarchical neurochemical mechanism underlying behavioural plasticity in swarming locusts and provide insights into the NPF/NO axis.
The plant hormone ethylene controls many growth and developmental processes but the coordination of its transcriptional response is not well understood. This study used chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and transcript sequencing to identify targets of the master regulator of the ethylene signaling pathway, EIN3, and found that ethylene-induced transcription occurs in temporal waves regulated by EIN3, suggesting distinct layers of transcriptional control. EIN3 binding modulates downstream transcriptional cascades and integrates many hormone mediated growth response pathways, linking major plant growth and development networks in novel ways. The study also identified genes that are induced and repressed upon ethylene treatment and revealed that the ethylene transcriptional response occurs in four distinct waves of transcription with different modes of regulation.
A study has identified genetic and environmental factors that contribute to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the most common chronic liver disease worldwide. The study examined liver steatosis and related clinical and molecular issues in over 100 unique inbred mouse strains fed a diet high in fat and carbohydrates. A 30-fold variation in hepatic TG accumulation was observed among the strains with genome-wide association studies revealing three loci associated with hepatic TG accumulation. Utilising transcriptomic data from liver and adipose tissue, researchers identified several high-confidence candidate genes for hepatic steatosis, including Gde1. The research provides multi-level data on genetic and environmental interactions underlying hepatic steatosis.
The research paper discusses the discovery of the environmental drivers and molecular basis of adaptation in nature through interdisciplinary syntheses. A combination of whole genome sequences, satellite remote sensing, and transgenic experiments were used to study loss-of-function alleles associated with drought histories in wild Arabidopsis thaliana. The study identified genes that show population genetic signatures of parallel molecular evolution and selection for loss-of-function, with shared associations with flowering time phenotypes in directions consistent with longstanding adaptive hypotheses. The findings reveal the importance of drought timing to explain the evolution of alternative drought tolerance strategies and further challenge popular assumptions about the adaptive value of genetic loss-of-function in nature. The research is motivated by the need to understand adaptive drought tolerance strategies for different types of drought conditions necessary for improving crop resilience against drought.
Neuromodulators are important in regulating communication within the nervous system, but their effect on network function is not always clear from synaptic wiring diagrams. The mapping of sites of neuromodulator action can help identify critical circuits involved in generating behaviors of interest. The hormones involved in insect molting meet the criteria for mapping sites of neuromodulator action. By using the Trojan exon method to investigate the downstream effectors of key factors involved in pupal ecdysis in Drosophila, researchers were able to show that the sites of action of these factors expose the structure and operational logic of the fly pupal ecdysis circuit. The findings suggest that identifying sites of neuromodulator action can be a productive strategy for mapping critical circuits in other complex behaviors.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside in a specialized niche in bone marrow, maintained by Leptin Receptor+ (LepR+) perivascular stromal cells and endothelial cells that secrete factors which promote their maintenance. Angiopoietin-1 (Angpt1) has been proposed to be expressed by osteoblasts in the bone marrow and promote the maintenance of quiescent HSCs in an osteoblastic niche, but HSCs and
This study investigates how tissue shape emerges from the collective mechanical properties and behavior of individual cells in the developing wing epithelium of Drosophila. The researchers use a combination of experiment and theory to quantitatively account for the reshaping of the wing blade. They show that cells generate and respond to epithelial stresses during the process, and that the nature of this interplay specifies the pattern of junctional network remodeling that changes wing shape. The study suggests that a complete understanding of the mechanical basis of morphogenesis will require new insights into tissue viscoelasticity in vivo and the cellular mechanisms that give rise to it. Additionally, the study investigates the physical constraints at the margin of the wing that maintain epithelial tension and contribute to the development of normal stresses in the wing blade. The study shows that apical extracellular matrix connections to the cuticle are required for shaping the wing during tissue flows.
The cholinergic interneurons (CINs) in the striatum of the basal ganglia play a crucial role in the motor and behavioral functions of the brain. CINs exhibit tonic firing with pauses that occur in response to motivationally significant events, but their function is unknown. A recent study investigated the effects of these pauses in CIN firing on the spiny projection neurons (SPNs), the output neurons of the striatum by using in vivo whole cell and juxtacellular recordings in mice. The study found that pauses in CIN firing resulted in inhibition and decreased firing of SPNs. The spiny projection neurons' membrane potential fluctuations became more hyperpolarized and UP state durations became shorter. Short-term plasticity of corticostriatal inputs also decreased during pauses in CIN firing. The results indicate that CINs exert control over striatal output by inhibiting SPN activity, providing a novel mechanism for cholinergic control of striatal output.
A study has found that temperature sensitivity in both TRP and Kv ion channels is intrinsic, challenging the previously held assumption that TRP channels had evolved to contain a specific "heat sensor". The study found that homologous voltage-gated potassium channels also exhibit high temperature sensitivity when the voltage sensor was functionally decoupled from the activation gate. The findings could help with understanding neuronal activity and potential roles of heat-induced variation in Kv channel activities. The study suggests that temperature-sensing TRP channels may not contain a specialized heat-sensor domain, but rather non-obligatory allosteric gating permits the intrinsic heat sensitivity to drive channel activation.
The type 1 pili of uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) play a crucial role in causing urinary tract infections (UTIs) and colonizing the gut. Researchers used cryo-electron microscopy to solve the 4.2 Å resolution structure of the pilus rod and identified mutations that decreased the force required to unwind the rod without affecting pilus production. UPEC strains with these mutations were less virulent in mice, leading researchers to suggest that the helical pilus rod has an important functional role in promoting colonization in the gut and infection of the bladder beyond serving as a platform for the FimH adhesin.
The drug FK506 (tacrolimus) is an inhibitor of a protein called calcineurin which is used to prevent transplant rejection and treat autoimmunity. FK506-treated dendritic cells (FKDC) can inhibit T-cell mediated autoimmune arthritis. The FKDC do not prevent dendritic cell survival, maturation, or costimulatory molecule expression, suggesting that the limited capacity of FKDC to stimulate T cells may be due to inhibition of calcineurin signaling in the dendritic cells. Instead, the DC inhibit T cells by sequestering FK506 and continuously releasing the drug over several days acting as a cellular drug delivery system to target antigen specific T cells. FK506 is limited because of the side effects including diabetes, hypertension, nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity, but the FKDC system has the potential to reduce drug dose and increase specificity in the treatment of autoimmune disease.
A new study has found that the protein Ambra1 is a “spatial rheostat” that controls the Src/FAK pathway, which is essential for the growth and survival of certain cancer cells. The research suggests that Ambra1 regulates the targeted movement of the active phospho-Src molecule from focal adhesions, which are cell surface proteins that are required for cell migration and differentiation into autophagic structures. Autophagy is the process by which cells break down and digest cellular waste materials and is essential for many biological processes, including embryonic development and the nervous system’s normal function. The study also found that Ambra1 binds to both FAK and Src proteins in cancer cells, with Ambra1 promoting FAK-regulated cancer-cell direction-sensing and invasion when FAK is present. The research also revealed that Ambra1 is a core component of an intracellular trafficking network linked to the spatial control of active Src and FAK.
Research using Drosophila has uncovered the important role of the microtubule-associated protein Tau in regulating synapse numbers, and its relationship with neurodegenerative factors, including dementias. It was found that Tau and the spectraplakin Short Stop act upstream of a regulatory cascade that ensures adequate delivery of synaptic proteins. This cascade acts during both synapse formation and maintenance. The correct formation and maintenance of synapses are essential for normal brain function, and disruptions can contribute to cognitive decline and neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Frontotemporal Dementia. The research suggests new explanations for intellectual disability in Tau-deficient individuals and early synapse loss in dementias. It also reveals that Tau and Shot functionally overlap in the formation of synapses, and that reductions in synapse numbers occur in the absence of either protein.
Animal RanBP1 has a different mechanism for dissociating cargo from nuclear export complexes than fungi RanBP1. While fungi RanBP1 sequesters RanGTP from nuclear export complexes, animal RanBP1 sequesters RanGTP from nuclear export complexes while binding to CRM1. Animal RanBP1 has an extra NES while fungi RanBP1 does not, but the significance of this difference is unknown. Animal RanBP1 requires an NES for its interaction with CRM1 in the presence of RanGTP, and this interaction is critical for the nuclear export of animal RanBP1. RanBP1 does not dissociate cargo through direct competition with the cargo's NES but rather sequesters RanGTP from export complexes. Animal and yeast proteins form different tetrameric complexes when excess RanGTP is present.
The document discusses a study of how stem cells for neural retina and retinal pigmented epithelium coordinate their growth rates in teleost medaka using a combination of clonal analysis and computational agent-based modeling. The study found that the spatial arrangement of the retinal ciliary marginal zone niche results in a spatially biased random lineage loss, where stem and progenitor cell domains emerge spontaneously. The data also indicate that neural retina cells orient division axes to regulate organ shape and retinal topology, and highlight an unappreciated mechanism for growth coordination where one tissue integrates cues to synchronize growth of nearby tissues. The study is significant in understanding how anatomically and functionally distinct tissues coordinate to grow and maintain the shape of an organ in functional homeostasis.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus has evolved a unique S1/S2 cleavage site that allows for mimicry of an FURIN-cleavable peptide on the human epithelial sodium channel α-subunit (ENaC-α), a protein critical for the homeostasis of airway surface liquid. This mimicry may compromise ENaC activation in infected cells, potentially leading to compromised fluid reabsorption, an important lung pathology in COVID-19 patients. Single cell RNA-seq analysis shows significant overlap between ENaC-α and the viral receptor ACE2 in cell types linked to COVID-19 pathophysiology. The virus may use multiple proteases for activation, including FURIN, PCSK5, PCSK6, and PCSK7. Redundancy may be wired into the mechanisms of host proteolytic activation of SARS-CoV-2. The mimicry of a cleavable host peptide central to pulmonary, renal, and cardiovascular function provides a new perspective to the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in causing a global coronavirus pandemic.
Oxidative protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can generate reactive oxygen species (ROS). A cysteine in the lumenal chaperone protein BiP is shown to be susceptible to oxidation by peroxide, disrupting BiP's ATPase cycle and thus helps cells cope with disruption to oxidative folding during oxidative stress. Ero1 is a primary enzymatic catalyst of biosynthetic disulfide bonds, which produces peroxide as a byproduct, making up to 25% of the cellular ROS produced during protein synthesis. Peroxiredoxin and glutathione peroxidases have been shown to reduce peroxide to water, enhancing oxidative protein folding. Yeast contains robust Ero1-dependent protein oxidation pathways but not mammalian PDRX4 or GPx7/8 systems. The conserved cysteine in BiP may play a selective role in managing oxidative but not reductive stress. Hyper-oxidation of the ER lumen by overexpression of Ero1* resulted in the direct modification of BiP by peroxide, and oxidation of BiP helps protect against oxidative stress in the ER by minimizing protein aggregation and maintaining ER folding homeostasis during excess ROS.
Abnormal signaling in the Raf/MEK/ERK (ERK/MAPK) pathway has been linked to neurodevelopmental disorders (RASopathies) and autism. This study found that the ERK/MAPK pathway is critical for the morphological development and survival of large Ctip2+ neurons in layer 5 of the neocortex, which is important for corticospinal tract formation. ERK/MAPK signaling is necessary for the expression of ARC and other plasticity-associated genes throughout all cortical layers, and important for the excitability of cortical pyramidal neurons in multiple layers. Loss of ERK/MAPK activity leads to a reduction in the number of CTIP+ layer 5 neurons and reduced neuronal somal size. In mouse models, conditionally deleting Map2k1/2 with a Cre-dependent Map2k1 allele shows that ERK/MAPK signaling is necessary for neurological function and the somal growth of excitatory neurons, but does not provide strong evidence of a widespread role in regulating global excitatory neuron number.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a transcriptional program activated in response to stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to increase ER folding capacity. During the UPR in budding yeast, Ire1 cleaves an intron from the HAC1 mRNA and the exon products are ligated to induce hundreds of stress-response genes. RNA repair and decay enzymes are involved in the degradation of HAC1 splicing intermediates and play a role in regulating the UPR. Excised HAC1 intron accumulates upon tunicamycin treatment and is a substrate for kinase-mediated decay with strict dependence on a 5′-phosphorylation step to promote 
The distribution of different types of cones in the mouse retina has been studied in two commonly used mouse strains. It was found that 'true S-cones' (S-opsin only) are highly concentrated in the ventral retina, making up up to 30% of cones, while S-cone bipolar cells (SCBCs) are also skewed towards the ventral retina, with wiring patterns matching the distribution of true S-cones. The authors suggest that this unique true S-cone and SCBC connection pattern forms a basis for mouse color vision, reflecting evolutionary adaptation to enhance color coding for the upper visual field suitable for mice’s habitat and behavior. The study also found that despite the differences in the distribution of other cone populations, the percentage and distribution of true S-cones were remarkably conserved between strains. The distribution of SCBCs was similarly skewed towards the ventral retina. Finally, the connections between true S-cones and SCBCs were studied, revealing that connectivity patterns differed between dorsal and ventral retina.
SynGAP is a protein found in the postsynaptic densities (PSDs) of the mammalian forebrain that regulates the composition of the PSD by restricting binding to the PDZ domains of PSD-95. Phosphorylation by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and Polo-like kinase-2 (PLK2) decreases its affinity for the PDZ domains, freeing them for occupancy by other proteins. SynGAP-α1 contains a PDZ-domain ligand and binds to all three of the PDZ domains of PSD-95. Its proposed function is to limit the availability of slots that can bind AMPAR complexes, thereby regulating the size and strength of the synapse. Reduction of synGAP in mice alters the composition of PSDs by reducing competition from synGAP-α1 for binding to PDZ domains of PSD-95. This proposed mechanism can explain many previous experimental observations, such as the movement of synGAP away from the PSD when CaMKII is activated by neurons.
The study investigates how cells react to non-chromosomal DNA circles that can form as a byproduct of genome repair. The researchers found that the SAGA complex in yeast mediates the interaction of non-chromosomal DNA circles with nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) and promotes their confinement in the mother cell during cell division. The DNA circles accumulate with time in the mother cell and promote ageing but also cause the retention and accumulation of NPCs, which affect the organization of ageing nuclei. These effects on nuclear organization are caused by the formation of an NPC cap, which accumulates at the nuclear periphery and covers one side of the nucleus. These findings provide insights into the asymmetric segregation of DNA circles and how age affects nuclear organization.
A study has found that conceptual metaphors, such as humans' mental representation of social rank as a pyramidal-like structure, also exist in our closest evolutionary relatives, chimpanzees. The study found that chimpanzees showed a modulation of response latencies by the rank of the presented individual and the position on the display: a high-ranked individual presented in the higher and a low-ranked individual in the lower position led to quicker identity discrimination than a high-ranked individual in the lower and a low-ranked individual in the higher position. The study suggests that a natural tendency to systematically map an abstract dimension exists in the common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees.
A bacterial lysozyme family has integrated independently in all domains of life across diverse environments, generating the only glycosyl hydrolase 25 muramidases in plants and archaea. During coculture of a hydrothermal vent archaeon with a bacterial competitor, muramidase transcription is upregulated. Transfer of a potent antibacterial gene across the universal tree seemingly bestows a niche-transcending adaptation that trumps the barriers against parallel HGT to all domains. The discoveries also comprise the first characterization of an antibacterial gene in archaea and support the pursuit of antibiotics in this underexplored group.
Two families of chromatin remodelers, ISWI and SWI/SNF, play opposing roles in histone organization. RSC, a SWI/SNF family remodeler, tends to disorganize or eject nucleosomes, while ISW1a, an ISWI family complex, organizes nucleosomes into tight arrays that can occlude DNA. This study examines the antagonistic relationship between R
Non-protein coding RNA molecules are common in eukaryotic genomes and many are transcribed antisense to protein-coding genes. The use of a synthetic RNAi system has shown that gene copy number is a key factor controlling RNA interference for transcripts from endogenous loci, because transcripts from multi-copy loci form double stranded RNA more efficiently than transcripts from equivalently expressed single-copy loci. This selectivity allows suppression of transposable elements. Low-level genome-wide pervasive transcription is sufficient to instigate RNAi, showing that pervasive transcription is part of a defense mechanism capable of directing a sequence-independent RNAi response against transposable elements. It is not yet clear whether this pervasive transcription simply represents transcriptional noise or whether the transcription or RNA molecules themselves have important, but as yet undiscovered, functions. Antisense non-protein coding RNAs exist for many yeast genes and produce more siRNA than genes lacking an antisense, but these genes do not show reduced mRNA levels, suggesting that insufficient siRNAs are produced to elicit a detectable mRNA knockdown. Endogenous sense-antisense pairs can form RNAi substrates and undergo efficient degradation by a minimal RNAi system.
A gene called IFIH1, which encodes the cytoplasmatic RNA sensor MDA5 that regulates the response to viral infections, can potentially influence the prognosis of severe COVID-19 patients. An observational study was conducted on COVID-19 patients in intensive care units, where the IFIH1 rs1990760 variant was determined. Patients with the TT variant showed a lower expression of inflammation-related pathways, anti-inflammatory cell profiles, and lower concentrations of pro-inflammatory mediators. Patients with the TT variant not treated with steroids were more likely to survive their ICU stay, while patients with the TT variant treated with dexamethasone showed an increased hospital mortality and serum IL-6. The study shows that people with the IFIH1 rs1990760 TT variant have an attenuated inflammatory response and better outcomes, while dexamethasone may reverse this anti-inflammatory phenotype.
The study examines the origin and development of the erectile ruff in frilled dragons. The authors use comparative developmental analyses and physical analog experiments to demonstrate that the ancestor of Episquamata reptiles developed a neck fold from the hyoid branchial arch by preventing it from fully fusing with posterior arches. Furthermore, they show that the frilled dragon's embryonic neck fold enlarges and wrinkles, establishing three convex ridges on each lobe of the frill, which is not due to localized increased growth at the positions of the ridges but emerges from an elastic instability. The frill of the Chlamydosaurus is a dramatic outgrowth of the hyoid arch ectoderm. The study also explores the evolution of the hyoid apparatus and the internalization of BAs in other species of squamates, which helps explain the development of a neck skin fold in the ancestor of Episquamata.
A new study has found that the yeast vacuole plays a positive, essential role in initiating the cell cycle. In fact, when inheritance fails, a new vacuole is generated. This occurs prior to the next cell cycle, and suggests that there may be mechanisms beyond inheritance that ensure that organelles are present in all cells. The study also found that a combination of a defect in inheritance with an acute block in vacuole biogenesis resulted in the loss of a functional vacuole and a specific arrest of cells in early G1 phase. The role for the vacuole in cell cycle progression requires an intact TORC1-SCH9 pathway that can only signal from a mature vacuole. The study findings suggest that the vacuole plays an essential role in cell cycle progression, but this role requires an intact organelle pathway.
Researchers have developed a framework to predict the shapes of characteristic patterns in the activity of neurons called eigenvectors. Eigenvectors have different time constants, depending on the speed at which neurons fire, and network architecture affects them. The researchers used linear networks of interacting nodes to study the relationship between eigenvectors and how they affect a network's temporal dynamics. They found that spatially local connectivity alone is not enough to produce the diversity of temporal behaviour observed in neural networks, since timescales need to be segregated. The researchers built two classes of network architecture, based on whether they exhibited homogeneity or heterogeneity in the connectivity profile, which allowed for the localization of different timescales to emerge. The method improves the understanding of the relationship between structural heterogeneity and functional diversity in biological networks beyond neural dynamics.
Ferret transmission experiments are frequently used to study the transmission potential of novel influenza strains in mammals, and to provide valid predictions of pandemic potential of such strains. However, the relationship between influenza transmission in ferrets and humans is uncertain. Researchers have compiled and analyzed 240 estimates of influenza transmission in ferrets and humans, and have found that estimates of ferret secondary attack rate (SAR) explain 66% of the variation in human SAR estimates at the subtype level. Ferret transmission experiments have potential to identify influenza viruses of concern for epidemic spread in humans, although small sample sizes and biological uncertainties prevent definitive classification of human transmissibility.
The accumulation of perineuronal nets (PNNs) around inhibitory interneurons is known to close critical periods (CPs) of plasticity in the neocortex. However, it was previously unknown how PNNs affect cortical function and plasticity. This study found that PNNs modulate the gain of visual responses and gamma-oscillations in the adult mouse visual cortex, consistent with increased interneuron function. Removal of PNNs did not affect GABAergic neurotransmission or neuronal excitability, but instead potentiated glutamatergic thalamic synapses selectively onto PV cells, ultimately controlling visual processing and plasticity by setting the strength of thalamic recruitment of PV cells. These effects were strongly attenuated by monocular deprivation, indicating that PNN-mediated modulation of thalamic input onto PV cells depends on visual activity. These results reveal the synaptic and circuit mechanisms by which PNNs restrict sensory plasticity in the adult visual cortex.
The article discusses the relationship between microbial community composition and invasion resistance in natural communities. Conducting experiments with naturally occurring bacterial assemblages, the study found that productivity is a key predictor of invasion resistance, which is consistent with previous findings in simplified, synthetic microbial communities. The study also identified functional groups of bacteria that have a significant impact on invasion resistance. Overall, the results suggest that factors affecting resident community productivity should be considered in future microbial invasion experiments.
Methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) can alleviate opioid dependence but may increase the risk of motor vehicle collisions. A population-based retrospective cohort study found that the incidence rates of motor vehicle collisions were significantly higher in opiate users receiving MMT than in those not receiving MMT. Researchers identified cases and controls by linking data from several nationwide administrative registry databases from 2009 to 2016. Kaplan–Meier curves of the incidence of motor vehicle collisions differed significantly between groups with a significant increased risk during the first 90 days of follow-up. Approximately 58 million people worldwide had opioid user in 2019, with 30 million accounting for opiate users.
A study examined whether genetic evaluation of ovarian cyst fluids could aid in the management of women with cystic lesions. Tumor-specific mutations were found in the cyst fluids of borderline tumors and type I and II cancers, but not in cyst fluids from non-neoplastic cysts or benign tumors. Genetic evaluation of cyst fluids could potentially inform management and reduce unnecessary surgery. Ovarian cysts are common but can be difficult to diagnose, as only a small percentage are malignant. The study suggests that genetic evaluation of cyst fluids could be a helpful tool in the diagnosis and management of ovarian cysts.
Researchers have used intracortical microstimulation (ICMS) in primary somatosensory cortex (S1) to mimic natural cutaneous and proprioceptive sensations to improve brain-machine interfaces for those who cannot sense these sensations due to spinal cord injury. They found that the amplitude, not frequency, of the electrical stimulus differentiates the modality of the elicited percept, and that some electrodes exhibit multimodal properties. The results suggest that ICMS could provide naturalistic percepts that mimic the body's natural physiological capabilities, and could improve performance and embodiment in brain-machine interfaces. The study also found a strong positive correlation between intensity and amplitude, and that the majority of percept responses were short.
The mechanism of transport through the Golgi complex is not completely understood, but a new study compares the transport of soluble secretory proteins with that of supramolecular cargoes and suggests that soluble proteins traverse the Golgi faster than larger cargo like procollagen, indicating the existence of multiple intra-Golgi trafficking modes. The study uses albumin and alpha-antitrypsin (antitrypsin), which are globular, water-soluble proteins, as prototypes of soluble proteins. The results suggest a transport mechanism that applies to a major class of secretory proteins and a multiplicity of transport mechanisms that help to explain most observed intra-Golgi trafficking patterns.
Geometric models provide a more intuitive and compact way to understand cell function than models assigning a variable to each gene. They can reduce dynamics to pictorial elements and explain developmental transitions. To illustrate, a geometric model of vulval development in Caenorhabditis elegans explains surprising observations attributed to signals and identifies special points with strong epistatic interactions between signals. Developmental states can be represented topographically as a cell’s downhill path in a shifting landscape controlled by cell signaling. The Waddington picture suggests that cell fate decisions can be separated from the complexity inherent in specification and morphogenesis, simplifying any model. The vulval development model shows that the movement of a cell in the landscape depends on parameters that quantify the influence of each signal on the direction of motion in the landscape. The authors suggest that taking a more abstract, yet mathematically rigorous, geometric approach can reveal underlying principles of development and provide immediate quantitative predictions more difficult to obtain through kinetic modeling of the complex underlying gene and protein networks.
Researchers have discovered how signal recognition particle (SRP) distinguishes ribosome-nascent chain complexes (RNCs) that have a signal sequence from those that do not. All previous work on the initial step of the targeting reaction, i.e. the moment when the SRP first binds to RNCs, used stalled and non-translating RNCs. According to the paper published in eLife, applying single-molecule fluorescence measurements to observe directly and in real-time how E. coli SRP binds to actively translating RNCs reveals at physiologically relevant SRP concentrations that SRP-RNC association and dissociation rates depend on nascent chain length and the exposure of a functional signal sequence outside the ribosome. The authors note that, until now, such an important dimension of the co-translational targeting process remained unstudied.
This document discusses a study that used single-cell sequencing to map the genetic heterogeneity of copy number alterations (CNAs) in breast cancer tumors, which are important for understanding prognosis and treatment. The study found genetic heterogeneity of non-tumor cells within the tumor mass, the extent to which CNA heterogeneity impacts breast cancer genomes, and the association of CNA heterogeneity with clinical and biological parameters such as polyploidy and estrogen receptor negative status. The study also found T-cells and B-cells within the tumor mass and observed genetically unique T-cells that were non-clonally derived and genetically distinct. The study identified pseudo-diploids in all breast cancer subtypes and found that some carried prototypical breast cancer CNAs. The study also found a wide range of fractional sub-clonal values in breast tumors, which ranged from significant to low levels of heterogeneity.
This document highlights the importance of proper mitotic spindle orientation in creating symmetric versus asymmetric cell division. The focus is on developing mouse neocortex and whether certain subpopulations of astral microtubules exist and how they can impact spindle orientation and division symmetry among polarized stem cells. The document provides an extensive background on the topic, including references to related studies in fungi and nematodes, as well as Drosophila and mammalian neurogenesis. The document outlines the new findings that a selective down-regulation of LGN at the basal cell cortex that leads to a specific decrease in apical/basal astrals causes the subtle spindle orientation deviations that switch mammalian APs from symmetric proliferative to asymmetric neurogenic divisions.
Scientists have discovered that the transcription factor IIA gamma subunit TFIIAγ5 from rice is a key component responsible for infection by the TALE-carrying bacterium Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, the causal agent for bacterial blight. The scientists discovered that TALE (transcription activator-like effectors) interacts with TFIIAγ5 directly to activate the host susceptibility genes. The genetic modification of TFIIAγ genes by mutation or suppression provides a widely applicable strategy to improve plant resistance to
A new method for single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) in budding yeast has been developed to investigate regulatory relationships between transcription factors and target genes. The method uses a transcriptionally barcoded gene deletion mutants in 11 different environmental conditions and incorporates multitask learning to construct global gene regulatory networks comprising 12,228 interactions. The study provides a generalizable framework for gene regulatory network reconstruction from scRNAseq data and establishes the use of droplet-based scRNAseq analysis of multiplexed genotypes in yeast. The yeast gene knockout collection facilitates pooled analysis of mutants using unique DNA barcode sequences that identify each gene deletion strain.
The ability to generalize previously learned information to new situations is important, but can cause problems if too wide or narrow. Research suggests that the interaction between the dopaminergic system and hippocampus may play a role in generalization. This study used pharmacology, functional magnetic resonance imaging, and computational modelling to investigate the role of dopamine and hippocampal processing in regulating the width of stimulus generalization. Blocking dopamine D2-receptors altered generalization behaviour and modulated similarity-based responses in the hippocampus, which suggests a potential target for treatment. The study found that dopaminergic activity in the hippocampus may relate to the degree of generalization.
The document discusses the concept of transcriptional memory, which allows certain genes to respond more robustly to previously experienced signals. The authors explore how the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α mediates transcriptional memory in HEK293F cells and find that sustained TNF-α stimulation induces transcriptional memory dependent on TET enzymes. They also identify five endogenous genes, including the CALCB gene, which displays the best transcriptional memory effect. The study reveals that TNF-α-mediated transcriptional memory is governed by active DNA demethylation and greatly sensitizes memory genes to much lower doses of inflammatory cues. The research sheds light on the characteristics of epigenetic modules governing transcriptional memory and their role in allowing cells to adapt to environmental changes.
Long-tailed macaques in Thailand are using tools to forage for shellfish, reducing prey size and abundance, and potentially having a negative impact on prey populations. The size of the tools used by the macaques matches the size of the prey they are targeting. The macaques on the densely populated island of Koram use smaller tools than those on the sparsely populated NomSao island. The difference in tool size selection is likely due to the longer length of accessible coastline on NomSao island per tool-using macaque. The macaques' tool-assisted predation could result in the depletion of prey populations if the trends continue, as observed in human predation.
Researchers from the University of Southern California in Los Angeles have found that the gold standard for cell cycle control may not function as previously thought. In research published in the journal eLife, the team showed that the accepted model of G1 cell cycle progression - and the associated use of the widely distributed "Rb" protein as a tumour suppressor - requires biophysical revision. This largely explains why biomarkers for cancer have been unreliable.

Researchers have discovered that the central supramolecular signalling cluster (cSMAC) – a signalling assembly of around one micron scale found at the centre of the interface of T cells activated by antigen-presenting cells - enhances early signalling by helping signalling interactions, and restrains signalling via the sequestration of a more limited collection of signalling intermediates. By using stimulated emission depletion super-resolution microscopy and correlative light electron microscopy, the team found that the cSMAC grew to become composed of many supramolecular complexes, with a supramolecular volume of up to 0.5 µm3, and was related to extensive membrane undulations. The team systematically manipulated the localisation of three key adaptor proteins to determine cSMAC function, and found that reduced central signalling localisation was linked to poor T cell activation. The scientists believe these findings are of substantial importance as cSMAC components play pivotal roles in viral sensing, inflammation, embryonic development, protein folding in cancer, nuclear ubiquitinoylation, and chromatin compaction, suggesting the research could have applications in a wide range of scenarios.
Opioid-induced respiratory depression (OIRD) is a lethal side effect of opioids, responsible for the deaths of over 400,000 people in the United States between 1999 and 2018. Biased agonists that provide opioid-like analgesia without depressing breathing have been developed, based on the idea that ß-arrestin 2-dependent signaling is responsible for OIRD. However, new research shows that there is no connection between ß-arrestin 2 and OIRD in mice. The goal of developing biased agonists for analgesia must therefore be reconsideed and reinvestigation of the mechanism of biased agonism in vivo is needed.
The principle neurons of associative learning regions receive combinatorial sensory inputs to represent complex stimuli. The density of combinatorial innervation determines the number of distinct stimuli that can be represented and distinguished from one another. How the convergence of combinatorial inputs to principle neurons of associative brain regions is established during development is unknown. In this research, the developmental patterning of sparse olfactory inputs to Kenyon cells of the Drosophila melanogaster mushroom body was explored. It was found that postsynaptic Kenyon cells set convergence ratio, producing fixed distributions of dendritic claws while presynaptic processes are plastic. Moreover, it was shown that sparse odor responses are preserved in mushroom bodies with reduced cellular repertoires, suggesting that developmental specification of convergence ratio allows functional robustness. The number of sensory inputs received by expansion layer neurons is a crucial parameter in sensory coding, and how the density of inputs to expansion layer neurons is developmentally programmed is not understood in any system.
The intergenic IRES of Cricket Paralysis Virus (CrPV-IRES) forms a complex with 80S ribosomes that is capable of initiating the synthesis of complete proteins in cell-free assays. This process can take place in the absence of initiation factors required in the cap-dependent pathway. Initiation of protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells proceeds via two pathways - cap-dependent pathway and IRES pathway. In this study, the authors demonstrate that the initial elongation steps are quite slow and are limited by the translocation step of the elongation cycle. They also show that the rate of elongation accelerates following translocation of tripeptidyl-tRNA to the P-site. The results offer a straightforward approach to detailed mechanistic characterization of many aspects of eukaryotic polypeptide elongation.
A team of researchers has presented the crystal structure of an active plant asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP) – an enzyme previously observed in plant vacuoles that can macrocyclize peptides – from the common sunflower, Helianthus annuus. The structural data provides a framework for engineering AEPs to better create macrocyclic peptides that are of interest to drug developers. Such peptides have potential for use as a bioactive scaffold, with higher bioavailability, stability and target specificities than current drugs.

The class of bacteria known as Mollicutes have been found to be abundant in the abdomen of healthy workers of attine fungus-farming leaf-cutting ants. The presence of two strains is associated with different substrate types offered to fungus gardens by foraging workers. The symbionts likely decompose excess arginine consistent with the farmed fungal cultivars providing this nitrogen-rich amino-acid in variable quantities. Both strains have complete phage-defense systems, suggesting they are actively maintained as mutualistic symbionts. Bacterial endosymbionts occur in all eukaryotic lineages and can have both positive and negative effects on their hosts depending on whether they are mutualists or parasites. The leaf-cutting ants are particularly amenable for hosting specialized bacterial symbionts because of their obligate reciprocity between cultivation and nutrition. EntAcro1 and EntAcro10 belong to the Entomoplasmatales group and were independently acquired as attine ant symbionts. The two strains are relatively similar to Mesoplasma/Mycoplasma clade, which predominantly consists of pathogens but includes one other plant symbiont. Metabolic reconstructions suggest all Entomoplasmatales are facultative anaerobes and differences in metabolism between the two attine symbionts and other insect-associated Spiroplasma/Mesoplasma strains were primarily found in pathways mediating catabolism of glycerol, dihydroxyacetone, citrate, arginine, and N-Acetylglucosamine.
Researchers have discovered how intracellular antibody signalling is regulated through a protein called TRIM21, and have revealed that the B-Box is a significant regulator of RING E3 ligase activity. TRIM21 is a unique cytosolic IgG receptor that forms a 1:1 complex by binding both heavy chains of a single IgG simultaneously. The receptor first detects antibody-coated pathogens in the cytosol and activates immune transcription pathways, including NF-κB, leading to upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The study found that TRIM21 signalling is repressed by its B-Box domain and activated by phosphorylation. The B-Box occupies an E2 binding site on the catalytic RING domain, inhibiting TRIM21 ubiquitination and preventing immune activation. TRIM21 is derepressed by phosphorylation of an LxxIS motif in the RING domain by TBK1 and IKKβ, promoting E2 binding, RING catalysis, NF-κB activation and cytokine transcription upon infection with DNA or RNA viruses.
The timing of meals has far-reaching effects on health, cognitive function, and circadian rhythms, according to a study in mice published in the journal eLife. Researchers examined the effects of chronic but stable misalignment of the circadian network in mice, caused by scheduling access to food during the sleep cycle, and found that the mis-timed feeding led to significant deficits in hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. The study may have broader implications for humans, given the growing evidence of the critical role timing of food intake plays in metabolic health.

Chromosomal instability (CIN) is common in solid tumors, but can also be deleterious to normal cells due to aneuploidy. However, inactivation of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) can induce CIN and drive tumorigenesis in mice with a conditional knockout of Mad21, an essential component of the SAC, resulting in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and hepatocellular carcinoma. The tumors experience ongoing CIN during their development, but specific aneuploid genomes predominate due to tissue-specific selection. The study demonstrates the synergy between Mad21 and Trp53 in the transformation of T-cells to malignant T-ALL and shows that tumors grow large enough to kill animals while remaining clonal at TCR loci. Liver-specific deletion of one or both Trp53 alleles in Mad21-wild type animals has no detectable impact on lifespan, consistent with previous data showing that Trp53 loss is only mildly oncogenic in hepatocytes.
This document discusses the challenges of understanding conformational exchange processes in proteins and the difficulty of obtaining atomic-level descriptions of transiently formed alternative conformations. The authors use enhanced-sampling molecular dynamics simulations to determine the free energy landscape of the L99A cavity mutant of T4 lysozyme, which captures key properties previously measured by NMR relaxation dispersion methods, including the structure of a minor conformation and the thermodynamics and kinetics of conformational exchange. They also discover a new tunnel that involves the transient exposure towards the solvent of an internal cavity and show it to be relevant for ligand escape. Together, their results provide a comprehensive view of the structural landscape of a protein and point forward to studies of conformational exchange in systems that are less characterized experimentally.
Changes in ocean temperature affect the distribution of fish stocks and the behavior of marine mammals, but it is not clear how these changes affect the health and survival of their offspring. In a study of South American fur seals, researchers found that pups receiving higher levels of maternal attendance had better energy balance and a more reactive immune system, which helped them to survive hookworm disease – a major cause of pup mortality. Maternal attendance was found to be higher in years with low sea surface temperature, and the mean hookworm burden and mortality increased with sea surface temperature over a 10-year period. The study provides a mechanistic explanation of how changes in ocean temperature and maternal care affect infectious diseases dynamics in marine mammals.
The Cdc48 enzyme plays a vital role in cellular processes in eukaryotic cells, and its archaeal homologue has been shown to directly interact with the 20S proteasome. Researchers have now analysed the occurrence and function of a Cdc48 homologue in Actinobacteria and have found that the Cdc48-like protein of actinobacteria (Cpa) forms hexameric rings, which correlates with its ATPase activity. Assembled Cpa rings can interact with the 20S core particle, and differences between wild-type Mycobacterium smegmatis and a Cpa knockout strain uncover significant changes in protein levels. The study identifies ribosomal proteins as a hotspot, suggesting a role of Cpa in ribosome adaptation during starvation.
A physical model of population dynamics of microbes competing for resources shows that coexistence of different metabolic types is possible, leading to the emergence of microbial consortia, or cartels, which act as divisions of labor, yielding maximum biomass and achieving a collective optimum. The model is tested under conditions of steady supply, and it is found that at steady supply, cartels of competing strategies can yield maximum biomass. The model, therefore, provides insight into the flux partitioning and division of labor in microbial communities. The framework is applied to spatially inhomogeneous conditions, with expectation of the emergence of spatial tiling in real microbial communities.
A study has found that the influx of calcium into hair cells in the inner ear, previously thought to be potentially harmful, is in fact crucial for the stability of stereocilia, the microvilli-like projections responsible for hearing. The tips of these stereocilia include mechanotransducer channels which are connected by tip links under tension. The tension ensures the cells are sensitive to smaller sounds by opening MET channels, which result in a continuous influx of calcium. The study found that a long-lasting blockage of MET channels leads to shortening and changes in stereocilia shape. This discovery provides a better understanding of how hair cells maintain the precise arrangement of stereocilia required throughout an organism's lifespan.
Schnyder corneal dystrophy (SCD) is a genetic condition that causes abnormal build-up of cholesterol in the cornea, resulting in vision problems. Mutations in the UBIAD1 gene have been identified in SCD patients. UBIAD1 is a prenyltransferase that synthesizes vitamin K2 and modulates cholesterol metabolism. The study shows that geranylgeraniol, a nonsterol isoprenoid, inhibits the binding of UBIAD1 to the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme HMG CoA reductase, thereby promoting its degradation and transport of UBIAD1 to the Golgi. SCD-associated mutations in UBIAD1 block its displacement from reductase, leading to accumulation of cholesterol. These findings identify UBIAD1 as the target of geranylgeraniol in reductase degradation and suggest that slowed degradation of reductase contributes to the pathogenesis
A study has found that in adult female fruit flies, their mid-gut is dramatically remodelled to enhance reproductive output. This contradicts previous models. The organ remodelling precedes increased nutrient intake and/or offspring demands. After mating, this is prompted by the juvenile hormone (JH), an anticipatory endocrine signal released and acting through intestinal proteins to create a larger organ. This is one of the first metabolic remodelling paradigms for adult somatic organs to link hormonal signals, epithelial plasticity, and reproductive output.
During the midblastula transition in developing organisms, when the cell cycle slows down, massive zygotic transcription begins. However, a few genes are transcribed before this stage and it is unknown how this differential activation is accomplished. In this study, the researchers performed ChIP-seq experiments on Drosophila embryos and discovered that Pol II recruitment occurs de novo during the midblastula transition, with widespread pausing. However, approximately 100 genes are strongly occupied by Pol II before this timepoint and do not show Pol II pausing, suggesting the requirement for rapid transcription during the fast nuclear cycles. This global change in Pol II pausing correlates with distinct core promoter elements and associates a TATA-enriched promoter with rapid early transcription. This difference in promoter usage is presumably because promoters have distinct dynamic properties.
Poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase 1 (PARP1) is an important protein involved in responding to DNA damage and acting as a chromatin architectural protein. However, it is not clear how PARP1 locates DNA damage sites in the context of undamaged DNA to which it also binds. This study found that PARP1 association with DNA is diffusion-limited and that the release of PARP1 from DNA is promoted by the binding of an additional DNA molecule that facilitates an 'intersegment transfer' mechanism, termed the 'monkey bar' mechanism. The WGR-domain of PARP1 is essential to this process, and a point mutation recapitulates the altered kinetics of the domain deletion. Clinically relevant inhibitors of PARP1 did not alter the rate or mechanism of the release of PARP1 from DNA. The study sheds light on how PARP1 efficiently localizes to sites of DNA damage to initiate repair and the importance of this mechanism of DNA release for the accumulation of PARP1 at DNA damage sites in the cell.
Loss of DNA polymerase ε proofreading, which is defective in tumors, has been identified as the highest tumor mutation burden found. It is unclear whether loss of DNA polymerase ε proofreading alone is sufficient to drive mutagenesis or if other factors are necessary. The study used next generation sequencing and in vitro biochemistry on human cell lines to investigate and found that absent mismatch repair, monoallelic Pol ε proofreading deficiency caused a dramatic increase in mutation signature. It suggests that suppression of mismatch repair is a critical force for driving the mutagenesis seen in tumors with defective DNA polymerase ε proofreading. This knowledge is important for understanding the mechanisms of mutagenesis during cancer development.
The link between pain and the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in Parkinson's Disease (PD) is unclear, but deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the STN has been shown to effectively treat pain in PD patients. This study used in vivo electrophysiology in rats to demonstrate that STN neurons respond to noxious stimuli and that nociception is altered following lesions of the STN. The study also characterized the role of brain structures, such as the superior colliculus and the parabrachial nucleus, in the transmission of nociceptive information to the STN. The study suggests that STN-linked nociceptive networks are important in neurological diseases involving a dysfunction of the basal ganglia. This research provides important insights into the potential mechanism by which STN-DBS can effectively treat pain in PD patients.
Using stem cells from mice, researchers have constructed synthetic microphysical neural networks in order to investigate how the cellular ratio of excitatory and inhibitory neurons affects the production of different motor behaviors. Circuitoids of purified excitatory interneurons were used to generate oscillatory bursts with similarities to in vivo central pattern generators. Inhibitory V1 neurons had dual layers of regulation within excitatory rhythmogenic networks - they increased the rhythmic burst frequency of excitatory V3 neurons, and segmented excitatory motor neuron activity into sub-networks. The study suggests that the speed and pattern of spinal circuits that underlie complex motor behaviors may be regulated by quantitatively gating the intra-network cellular activity ratio of E-to-I neurons, providing a potential way of generating complex but flexible motor behaviors.
A study conducted on gliomas, highly malignant brain tumors, has identified the genetic requirement for nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT) in glioma progression both in vivo and in human glioma cells. The study revealed that overexpressing enzymatically active NMNAT promotes glial neoplasia growth, reduces animal viability, and interferes with DNA damage-p53-caspase-3 apoptosis signaling pathways. Moreover, modulating p53 posttranslational modifications (PTMs) could be a key mechanism through which NMNAT promotes glioma growth. Targeting NMNAT in the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) salvage synthetic pathway could prove to be a potential alternative to anti-cancer therapies targeting NAD+ synthesis. The study was conducted on flies and human glioma cells to validate its findings.
The document discusses the receptor tyrosine kinase Her2, which is an important drug target and is implicated in the growth of various cancers. Her2 differs from other members of the EGFR family as it does not bind EGF-like ligands and relies instead on heterodimerization with other ligand-bound EGFR-family receptors for activation. The structural basis for Her2 heterodimerization remains poorly understood, but recent studies suggest a possible structural basis for Her2 heterodimerization based on asymmetric ectodomain dimer structures of Drosophila EGFR. Long-timescale molecular dynamics simulations show that a single ligand is necessary and sufficient to stabilize the ectodomain interface of Her2 heterodimers, which assume an asymmetric conformation similar to that of dEGFR dimers. The unique dimerization properties of Her2 are believed to be essential to its critical role as a potent signal amplifier for the other receptors of the EGFR family. The Her3-Her2 heterodimer is particularly prevalent and potent in signaling and is implicated in a number of forms of cancer.
The document describes five new crystal structures of DNA polymerase I that capture new conformations for the polymerase translocation and nucleotide pre-insertion steps in the DNA synthesis pathway. The structures suggest that the finger subdomain in the enzyme active site is dynamic. The document also proposes a revised mechanism for DNA synthesis by DNA polymerase I, consisting of four key steps: post-translocation, pre-insertion complex, closed ternary complex, and post-catalytic complex. The document presents high resolution crystal structures of DNA polymerase I, expanding our understanding of the mechanism of DNA synthesis.
A molecular pathway that stimulates the regenerative potential of injured axons has been identified by scientists. Repair of lost axonal connections generally fails to occur after neuronal injury in the adult mammalian central nervous system, but neurons do possess an innate ability to regenerate their axons in the adult mammalian central nervous system, by a conditioning lesion. Several signal transduction pathways are activated in DRG neurons upon a conditioning injury, including cAMP. Researchers have found that DLK/Wnd is a direct upstream activator of cAMP in injured axons. PKA is required for the induction of Wnd signaling in injured axons, and DLK is essential for the regenerative effects of cAMP in mammalian DRG neurons. This presents a unified and evolutionarily conserved molecular pathway from cAMP to PKA to DLK, which plays a central role in stimulating the innate ability of injured axons to regenerate.
The neural mechanisms underlying dyslexia, a prevalent reading disability, have been studied using a frequency-discrimination task. It was hypothesized that implicit memory decays faster among dyslexics. Dyslexics showed a faster decay of implicit memory effects on both measures, with similar time constants. This paradoxically accounted for their longer reading times as it reduced their temporal window of integration of past stimuli, resulting in noisier and less reliable predictions for both simple and complex stimuli, which limit their acquisition of reading expertise. Dyslexics have difficulties in acquiring peer-level reading skills despite adequate education. Their general reasoning skills are within the normal range, but they consistently show difficulties in some language-related skills. This paper outlines a range of tests performed to explore the nature of dyslexics' difficulties. These observations pave the way to pursue the deficits underlying dyslexia in non-human animals.
A new study has revealed that mitochondria in neuronal dendrites stop moving as they mature, instead "localizing" to critical synapses and branch points where they have most use in providing energy as well as participating in calcium signaling. While earlier findings showed that Ca2+ flux hinders movement in cultured neurons, this study results indicate that spontaneous or sensory-evoked activity and Ca2+ transients do not alter motility of dendritic mitochondria in retinal ganglion cells. Researchers found motility during the period of dendrite growth and synaptogenesis was about 30%, but very few moved in mature circuits. The report’s findings challenge the previous view of mitochondria as highly motile organelles which change distribution constantly, and indicate that dendritic mitochondria reach stable positions during a critical developmental period of high metability.
The document discusses the discovery of lysis inhibition in Vibrio cholerae, which is infected by the phage ICP1. The mechanism of lysis inhibition involves the ICP1-encoded holin (TeaA) and antiholin (arrA), and a phage satellite PLE which collapses the lysis inhibition. The satellite PLE is found integrated into the chromosome of clinical V. cholerae isolates and functions as an abortive infection system. The document also discusses the importance of lysis timing during infection and parasitization, and the significance of LIN as an important adaptation in environments where host bacteria are scarce but free virions are plentiful.
The assembly of different types of axonemal dyneins is necessary for ciliary/flagella motions, but the roles of each subtype and their assembly processes remain elusive in vertebrates. The PIH protein family, consisting of four members, is thought to be involved in the assembly processes, although evidence of this has been sparse. In this study, zebrafish mutants of all four PIH-protein genes were established and analyzed to reveal that all vertebrate PIH proteins have different requirements for cilia/flagella motions and the assembly of axonemal dyneins. Organ-specific compositions of dynein subtypes were also found, which could explain the severe motility defects of mutant Kupffer’s vesicle cilia. This is the first report that shows all vertebrate PIH proteins as DNAAFs, assigning their functions to specific types of axonemal dyneins and to cilia/flagella motions.
This study proposes a new model to understand the long-term effects of the growing population of HIV-treated people on individuals and the public health sector in Southern Africa. The model compares CD4+ T-cell counts of HIV-infected individuals to healthy population reference values, using mixed-effects regression to fit the data from 1616 children and 14,542 adults. The study found that the scaled carrying capacity, maximum CD4+ count, and baseline scaled CD4+ counts were closer to healthy values in children than in adults. The CD4+ growth rate was inversely correlated with baseline CD4+ T-cell counts, and higher in adults than children post-ART initiation. The study highlights the impacts of age on the immune system dynamics of healthy and HIV-infected individuals. The key outcome variable is scaled CD4+ T-cell count, which enables comparisons of CD4+ T-cell count responses across ages while accounting for the child's growth and immune system development. The study demonstrates that larger values of baseline scaled CD4+ T-cell counts are associated with larger values of scaled CD4+ T-cell counts at any subsequent time.
The article focuses on synaptic transmission components - fast and slow, which are mediated by different exocytic proteins. The study shows that fast release is mediated by UNC-13L, while slow release requires both UNC-13 proteins, and Tomosyn inhibits slow release. These findings suggest that these proteins form a molecular code that determines the timing of neurotransmitter release. The study also explores the location of each protein and its effect. Moreover, the article analyzes the mechanisms regulating release kinetics and how each UNC-13 protein contributes to synaptic function.
A team of scientists has created an “atlas” representing the key developmental stage of human organ formation so as to aid the study of congenital disorders, including cleft palate and congenital heart disease. The research discovered more than 6,000 novel transcripts of non-coding RNA, which the scientists discovered to be useful in identifying instances of developmental deficiencies during embryogenesis. The take-home message: this is a vital resource for better understanding human organogenesis and its associated disorders.

Bacterial mRNAs are organized into operons, which comprise of discrete open reading frames (ORFs) in a single polycistronic mRNA. Different rates of translation of individual ORFs are controlled by signals which are poorly understood. The study examined how intrinsic ORF mRNA structure encodes a blueprint for translation efficiency. It was found that this structure provides the self-reinforcing loop, which specifies the translation of each ORF. The study investigated in vivo mRNA structure using the dimethyl sulfate (DMS)-seq technique and determined the degree of RNA secondary structure variation between ORFs. The Gini index metric was used to measure the variability in reactivity of A and C residues to DMS in the mRNA. The study concludes that mRNA is organized in ORF-wide structures that depend on the intrinsic sequence of the mRNA.
The chaperone BiP plays an important role in protein folding homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). It is subject to post-translational modifications that affect its activity, but the nature of these modifications has been unclear. Researchers have now identified that BiP can be AMPylated on the Thr518 residue by the enzyme FICD, which is located within the ER. This modification, which is strictly FICD-dependent and found to increase as protein flow decreases into the ER, enhances peptide dissociation from BiP and abolishes stimulation of ATP hydrolysis by J-domain cofactor. The researchers provide evidence that AMPylation of BiP is an inactivation modification, which is induced when client protein burdens are low.
The planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling pathway directs the polarization and asymmetry of cell structures, divisions, and migration in invertebrates and vertebrates. This document describes a morphogenetic process in which PCP-directed apical rotation causes a helical structure of defined chirality in the socket and shaft cells of Drosophila anterior wing margin mechanosensory bristles. The Frizzled/Vang PCP signaling module coordinates polarity and the dynamic interplay between two isoforms of the Prickle protein determines right- or left-handed bristle morphogenesis. The Fat/Dachsous PCP directional signal couples oppositely with Pkpk or Pksple predominance. Different isoforms of Pk are proposed to determine the direction in which core PCP signaling responds to directional information provided by the Fat/Ds/Fj system. The paper also discusses the role of PCP signaling in various tissues and disorders in humans. The study analyzed 3D structures of shaft-socket sibling pairs to understand the developmental process by which the shaft and socket relationship is achieved, which may contribute to determining bristle polarity.
A recent study has shown that there is no lipid turnover in the center of the human ocular lens during an individual’s entire lifetime, unlike most other tissues where lipids turnover rapidly. This discovery is significant, as it suggests that some lipids are long lived while others are not. Changes in lens cell membranes over several decades may play a role in age-related eye disorders. This may have implications for other post-mitotic cells that contain long-lived lipids, where age-related deterioration of these lipids may lead to changes in the properties of individual organs and overall body function. The study utilized accelerator mass spectrometry to measure carbon-14 levels in lipids extracted from the human lens nucleus, which is comprised of cells synthesized in utero with no cellular organelles. The study found that the fraction of 14C present in the lipid extract from a human lens nucleus is a highly accurate predictor of the year of birth, indicating negligible lipid turnover during an individual’s lifetime. The composition of human lens membranes is different from other mammals and is chemically stable due to the abundance of sphingomyelins, which have been discovered intact in a 40,000-year-old woolly mammoth.
White adipose tissue (WAT) inflammation contributes to insulin resistance in obesity. The role of adipose tissue macrophage (ATM) pro-inflammatory signalling in insulin resistance has been established, but how WAT inflammation is initiated is less clear. Researchers found that ATMs isolated from obese mice and humans exhibit markers of increased rate of de novo phosphatidylcholine (PC) biosynthesis. Macrophage-specific knockout of phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase A (CCTα), the rate-limiting enzyme of PC biosynthesis pathway, alleviated WAT inflammation and insulin resistance. This was attributed to reduced ER stress and inflammation in response to palmitate, due to lower membrane PC turnover leading to elevated membrane polyunsaturated fatty acid levels that negated the pro-inflammatory effects of palmitate. These findings suggest that obesity-related increases in de novo PC synthesis, accelerated PC turnover, and pro-inflammatory activation of ATMs are causally linked. Obese individuals have an increased expression of Pcyt1a (CCTα) in macrophages isolated from WAT. Reducing the activity of the de novo PC synthesis pathway maintains the cellular PC pool size but increases the half-life of PCs, leading to increased incorporation of PUFAs into PCs, which protects macrophages from palmitate-induced ER stress and pro-inflammatory activation. Macroscopic deletion of Pcyt1a did not affect ATM development, adipose tissue function, and glucose metabolism in lean animals, but improved systemic glucose handling in Lepob/ob mice, the model of obesity in which induction of Pcyt1a in the ATM population was originally observed. These findings suggest that improved glucose metabolism in obese mice may be due macrophage-specific Pcyt1a deletion leading to a shift from M1 to M2 polarization, and also supressing pathways associated with ER stress and macrophage-driven inflammation.
Scientists have sequenced the genome of Parhyale hawaiensis, a small crustacean that is becoming an effective model for developmental and regeneration studies. Parhyale is a member of the diverse Malacostraca clade, which includes economically important species such as shrimp, crabs, crayfish and lobsters, making it an ideal system for comparative studies. It also has the ability to perform lignocellulose digestion (‘wood eating’), which until now was thought to be restricted to few animals. Genomic data from Parhyale are expected to lead to more research in comparative biology, developmental genetics and cell biology.
A new study has found that complement factor-H related 3 (CFHR3) promotes immune activation by acting as an antagonist of complement factor H (CFH). It has been shown that variation within the complement factor H (CFH) gene family links to susceptibility to meningococcal disease caused by infection with Neisseria meningitidis. The study found that CFHR3 bound to the bacterial surface of N. meningitidis in an fHbp-dependent manner, promoting complement-mediated lysis, leading to suggestions that CFHR3 could be used to prevent N. meningitidis infection in some people. 

Researchers have identified a specific protein, TRPM5, that is required for the secretion of Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), a gel-forming mucin that is one of the major components of mucus in the airways. TRPM5, a calcium-activated channel, was found to be required for the secretion of MUC5AC from the post-Golgi secretory granules in cancer goblet cell lines. The researchers established a quantitative assay to measure the secretion of MUC5AC from a human goblet cell line, and used it to screen 7343 human gene products, leading to the discovery of TRPM5's involvement in MUC5AC secretion. The secretion of MUC5AC is essential for the normal physiology of the wet mucosal epithelium, protecting against pathogens and other forms of cellular abuse.
During sleep, consolidation of memories occurs and new experiences may interfere with this process, potentially leading to maladaptive memories. However, new experiences during sleep can also trigger a protein synthesis-dependent process that blocks the formation of new long-term memories, preventing the formation of maladaptive memories. Training during the sleep phase typically does not lead to long-term memory formation, but inhibiting protein synthesis can make these experiences effective. The study used Aplysia feeding as a learning paradigm, showing that consolidative proteins already expressed before training are necessary for long-term memory formation, with subsequent transcription and translation also required. The study suggests that active processes promoting consolidation occur during sleep and the need to limit new experiences that could potentially interfere with memory consolidation.
Researchers have identified a new biochemical interaction between endothelial cells, CD171 or L1CAM, and a splicing factor called NOVA2 that facilitates the skipping of the L1CAM transmembrane domain in ECs. This leads to the release of soluble L1-ΔTM, a protein that promotes the growth of blood vessels through both autocrine and paracrine activities. NOVA2 and L1-ΔTM are over-expressed in the vasculature of ovarian cancer, where L1-ΔTM may assist the tumour in creating a blood supply. The finding opens the possibility of developing drugs that target the new protein to help prevent tumours growing blood supplies.
Researchers have identified two proteins, FAM150A and FAM150B, which activate anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). This receptor is already known to have a role in neuroblastoma and certain other cancers. The researchers found that the FAM150 proteins activate signalling via the wild-type ALK receptor by binding to its extracellular domain. The glycine-rich region of the ALK receptor was found to be an important factor for FAM150 activation. Antibodies to this region were found to inhibit activation of ALK by FAM150A.
The document discusses the formation of membrane invaginations called caveolae in mammalian cells, which are formed by a cooperation between cavin proteins and the scaffolding protein caveolin. The researchers developed a single-molecule fluorescence approach to directly observe interactions and stoichiometries in protein complexes from cell extracts and in vitro synthesized components. They found that up to 50 cavins can associate on a caveolae, forming two distinct subcomplexes of cavin1-cavin2 and cavin1-cavin3. The researchers also found that changes in membrane tension can cause the release of the cavin coat and its disassembly into separate subcomplexes on the surface of caveolae. The study suggests that the cavin coat complexes may provide a possible mechanism for spatial and temporal regulation of caveola formation.
Bengalese finches, which can sing variable syllable sequences, have been shown to be able to learn to rapidly modify the probability of specific sequences in response to arbitrary visual cues, demonstrating a capacity for learned contextual control over syllable sequencing. This parallel's human cognitive control over syllable sequencing in speech and raises questions about the evolutionary and neural circuit mechanisms that have enabled the development of this flexibility, which still remain poorly understood. The results suggest that Bengalese finches are able to learn context-specific modifications to syllable sequencing and can implement an immediate shift in sequencing on the first rendition in a block before they have a chance to learn from reinforcing feedback. The research provides insight into the evolution of human speech and could lead to new therapies for speech disorders.
SNX6 is a protein that plays important roles in retrograde vesicular transport from endosomes. A new study reports that CNS-specific Snx6 knockout mice exhibit deficits in spatial learning and memory, accompanied by loss of spines from dendrites of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells. SNX6 interacts with Homer1b/c, a postsynaptic scaffold protein crucial for the synaptic distribution of other PSD proteins and structural integrity of dendritic spines. The study shows that SNX6 functions independently of retromer to regulate the distribution of Homer1b/c in the dendritic shaft. Ablation of SNX6 causes reduced distribution of Homer1b/c in distal dendrites, decreased surface levels of AMPAR, and impaired AMPAR-mediated synaptic transmission. These findings uncover a physiological role of SNX6 in CNS excitatory neurons.
The article discusses the study of the young "social" supergene of fire ants to understand the evolution of early supergenes. The hypothesis is that gene degeneration and social antagonism have shaped the fire ant supergene's evolution, resulting in distinct patterns of gene expression. The study identified allelic differences between supergene variants, characterized allelic expression across populations, castes, and body parts, and contrasted allelic expression biases with differences in expression between social forms. The results indicate strong signatures of gene degeneration and gene-specific dosage compensation. However, there is an overrepresentation of Sb-biased genes among genes with higher expression in individuals from multiple-queen colonies, indicating that antagonistic selection has also shaped the expression patterns in the fire ant supergene. The study highlights the importance of considering the genomic context of gene expression patterns before making inferences about functionality.
This study uses electron microscopy and cryo electron tomography to investigate the structural basis for the interaction between Gic1 and Cdc42 with septin filaments. The results show that Gic1 acts as a scaffolding protein, stabilizing septin filaments to form long and flexible filament cables. Cdc42 in its GTP-form binds to Gic1 and leads to the dissociation of Gic1 from the filament cables, while Cdc42-GDP interacts directly with septin filaments, resulting in their disassembly. The study proposes a novel regulatory mechanism for septin filament formation and dissociation. The study also provides insight into the structural organization of human septins at the atomic level and how they differ from other cytoskeletal structures.
Scientists used the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway to examine the effect of signal transmission through sub-cellular compartments and its effect on transcription levels in individual cells within a population. They found that variability in nuclear b-catenin accumulation could occur in two waves, followed by slow clearance. They determined that the nuclear accumulation rate of change of the signaling factor, and not actual protein levels, correlated with the transcriptional output of the pathway. This pathway has received much experimental attention due to its centrality in gene expression patterning, and its involvement in many cancer types.
Researchers have shown that histone acetyltransferase Kat2a contributes to the preservation of leukemia stem-like cells in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by controlling transcriptional variability. The researchers used chromatin profiling and single-cell transcriptomics to demonstrate that Kat2a loss impacts transcription factor binding and reduces transcriptional burst frequency, thus generating enhanced variability of transcript levels that can shift leukemia cell fate out of self-renewal into differentiation. The study provides a paradigm exploitable in different tumors and distinct stages of cancer evolution. AML is a heterogeneous disease, clinically and pathologically, with common cellular themes of myeloid differentiation block, and recurrent molecular targeting of chromatin and transcriptional regulators.
Actin waves, structures similar to growth cones, are responsible for transporting microtubules and directing the growth of neurites during the multi-polar state of developing neurons. Actin waves allow for increased microtubule polymerization, which directs Kinesin-based transport and creates bursts of neurite extension. These waves also require microtubule polymerization, creating a positive feedback loop. Actin waves promote competition between neurites as they explore the environment until sufficient external cues can direct one to become the axon. During the multi-polar state, neurons extend 4-5 immature neurites before a single neurite is specified as the axon. Actin waves trigger stochastically and are linked to neurite outgrowth and axon specification. The correlation between actin waves and microtubule-based transport led to the discovery that actin waves coordinate with Kinesin-1 motor domain, pulsatile transport.
A study has identified a group of prostate cells, known as proximal luminal cells (PLCs), marked by the transcription factor RUNX1, which are distinct from previously identified NKX3.1+ luminal castration-resistant cells. The PLCs are intrinsic castration-resistant and self-sustaining and contribute to the development of the ducts of the prostate. The study found that RUNX1+ PLCs are unaffected by androgen deprivation and do not contribute to the regeneration of distal luminal compartments of the prostate. The study also found that RUNX1 marks a discrete subset of luminal cells located in the proximal region of the prostate's ducts. RUNX1 was examined in Runx1-specific fluorescent reporter mouse models, and it was found that P2-Runx1:RFP mediated Runx1 expression in the prostate, which is exclusively expressed in the proximal region of the ducts. Following castration, there was a significant increase in the frequency of RFP+ epithelial cells to 87%, and RUNX1 was detected in the majority of the castration-resistant cells. The transition from RUNX1+ to NKX3.1+ cells identified in the proximal luminal layer of intact mice was conserved after castration. Droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing was performed to further examine the RUNX1+ and RUNX1- fractions residing at different anatomical locations of the prostate. Nine in silico computed clusters expressing canonical epithelial, basal, and luminal markers were identified. Lum-A/B/C/D were mainly enriched in luminal cells from intact prostates, while Lum-E/F consisted mainly of castrated luminal cells.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is linked to a range of human disorders, including rare inherited metabolic diseases and common age-related diseases such as neurodegeneration. The link between mitochondrial dysfunction and diverse pathologies is not fully understood. In an effort to investigate the proximal consequences of mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction, a study by Kennedy et al. used complementary metabolite, RNA, and protein profiling. The researchers found alterations in one-carbon metabolism pathways upon mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction, which suggests a connection between them for better understanding of mitochondrial pathogenesis. The study identifies a new metabolic vulnerability of cells facing mitochondrial stress, which can have implications for the diagnosis and treatment of human mitochondrial disorders, and can form a basis for future research in the field.
A study has shown that there are functionally distinct subpopulations of dopaminergic (DA) neurons present in the olfactory bulb (OB), with embryonic and postnatal neurogenesis producing different subtypes. Large, axon-bearing DA neurons are produced during early embryonic stages, leaving small anaxonic neurons as the only DA subtype generated via adult neurogenesis. The two subpopulations are functionally distinct, with embryonically generated DA neurons displaying a stronger but more broadly tuned response to odorant stimuli. The study also found that the two subpopulations have distinct dendritic morphologies, with large, axon-bearing DA neurons having more broad dendritic arborisations. The presence or absence of an axon initial segment (AIS) serves as an indicator of subpopulation identity. Embryonic and postnatal neurogenesis, therefore, generates distinct neuronal subclasses, which can have different functional roles in sensory processing.
A study in Uganda examined immunity to symptomatic malaria as a function of age and transmission intensity. The study found that anti-parasite and anti-disease immunity develop in parallel and that age plays a strong role in both types of immunity. Children living in moderate/high transmission settings develop immunity faster as transmission increases, but children in the lowest transmission setting appear to develop immunity more efficiently than those living in moderate transmission settings. Gradual acquisition of immunity against symptomatic malaria is a key driver of the epidemiology of malaria, which typically peaks in early childhood and then declines while the prevalence of asymptomatic parasitemia increases throughout childhood. The study found an independent effect of exposure, where increasing exposure and increasing age were independently and linearly associated with decreases in the parasite densities. Anti-disease immunity refers to the ability to tolerate a certain parasite density without developing objective fever. The association between exposure level and anti-disease immunity was less evident than the association with age. The expected probability of symptomatic disease for a child aged 1 year living in a setting with an average entomological inoculation rate (aEIR) of 50 is 0.92, but it decreases to 0.51 by age 10 years.
The article explores the ability of humans to discriminate odors and compares it to color vision. While a recent study claims that humans can discriminate at least 1 trillion odors, the author argues that the mathematical method used to arrive at this conclusion is flawed. The exact number of discriminable odors and the dimensionality of perceptual space for odors remain uncertain, and further analysis is required. Contrastingly, color vision has been extensively studied and is based on three kinds of cone photoreceptors in the retina that differ in their sensitivity to the wavelength spectrum of light, allowing for a three-dimensional perceptual space. Experimental proof of this dates back to the 17th century.
A study conducted in New Delhi, India recruited 2512 people who inject drugs (PWID) using a sociometric network design. The study found a high burden of HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV) prevalence among PWID with a highly interconnected injection and spatial network structure. The odds of prevalent HIV and active HCV infection decreased with each additional degree of separation from an infected alter and increased among those who injected at a specific venue independent of individual-level factors. The study highlights the importance of incorporating network and spatial data in designing and implementing interventions to interrupt transmission while improving efficiency.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a vision-threatening disease characterized by defects in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), photoreceptors, and choriocapillaris. RPE dysfunction is a primary event, which can lead to progressive photoreceptor degeneration. Using mouse models, a study shows that hypoxia-induced metabolic stress results in photoreceptor atrophy as glucose and lipid metabolism are radically altered in hypoxic RPE cells. Thus, understanding the molecular pathways that control these responses may offer insights into the pathogenesis of AMD and future therapies. The onset of other early clinical manifestations of AMD in neighboring cells and structures is thought to be due to hypoxia and reduced choroidal and retinal blood flow. The study also links the ablation of VEGF to severe choriocapillaris deficits in mice, which can lead to AMD-like features, photoreceptor atrophy, and dysfunction.
Porphyrias are disorders affecting heme metabolism resulting in extreme photosensitivity. Researchers have discovered that planarian flatworms generate porphyrins, an intermediate in heme biosynthesis that causes reactive oxygen species and light-induced depigmentation, in their subepithelial pigment cells. Starvation enhances porphyrin biosynthesis and light-induced depigmentation similar to porphyrias. Porphyrins accumulate in some organisms, such as birds, invertebrates, and bacteria, but their functions are often unknown. Light exposure causes depigmentation in the planarian flatworm S. mediterranea, and prolonged exposure causes pigment cell loss. S. mediterranea is an experimentally tractable animal model for the study of porphyrias and the identification of novel pharmacological interventions.
The sulfhydration of cysteine residues in proteins is an important biological process that can be regulated by reactive oxygen species and other intracellular or environmental cues. The biological significance of protein sulfhydration is not well understood, but it has been shown to regulate biological processes by fine-tuning cellular redox states. Researchers have developed a proteomics approach to quantitatively profile the changes of sulfhydrated cysteines in biological systems, and have found sulfhydrated cysteines to be part of a wide range of biological functions in pancreatic β cells that stimulate glycolytic flux, and that the sulfhydration of enzymes in energy metabolism mediates metabolic alterations triggered by oxidative modification. This study has used immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to show that cysteine sulfhydration is a reversible cysteine-based post-translational modification that regulates metabolism to fine-tune cellular redox states. The researchers have developed innovative experimental approaches for a quantitative evaluation of the sulfhydrated proteome that is pertinent to their understanding of human disease development.
This study analyzes the evolution of influenza viruses, which mutate and evolve rapidly, causing thousands of deaths each year. The research focuses on understanding the process of antigenic drift, or the ability of the virus to evolve and evade immunity. The study uses a Bayesian approach to examine both the genetic and antigenic evolution of influenza viruses, using hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays to measure cross-reactivity between different strains. The researchers find that A/H3N2 evolves more quickly and in a more punctuated fashion than other influenza lineages, and that year-to-year antigenic drift drives incidence patterns within each influenza lineage. They also find that genetic relationships between viruses provide some predictive power for estimating antigenic distances. The study's findings have important implications for the development of more effective vaccines and public health interventions to control influenza.
The Notch signaling pathway has a role in early preimplantation stages of mammalian development and interacts with other signaling pathways such as Hippo. Notch is active from the 4-cell stage and plays a role in driving transitions during the gradual loss of potency that takes place in the early mouse embryo. The establishment of early lineages is achieved by a combination of morphogenetic cues that break symmetry in the embryo. Notch coordinates the triggering of initial differentiation events within the embryo and regulates the early specification of the trophectoderm. Notch and Hippo pathways are largely independent but correlate with CDX2 expression at the morula stage, and suggest they could be acting independently from each other in its regulation. They act sequentially to regulate CDX2 levels in a stage-specific manner rather than being redundant. Different allelic combinations for Rbpj and Tead4 lead to reduced expression of CDX2, and double mutant embryos die before the blastocyst stage.
Researchers have gained insight into how some promising but difficult-to-treat proteins can help to drive cancer. In the study, University of Cambridge researchers looked at how certain antibodies bind to PD-1 proteins on T cells, allowing cancer cells to evade the body's immune system. PD-1 binds to two protein molecules called PD-L1 and PD-L2, which belong to a family called ligands. The researchers found PD-L2 only binds to molecules called macrocycles, offering scope to find drugs that disrupt the process and thus block the cancer cells. A drug called pembrolizumab, which is marketed by Merck as Keytruda, works by blockading PD-L1, and a similar drug being developed by Roche targets PD-L1 and T cells together.
Gene expression noise refers to the variability in gene expression within genetically identical cells, and can be influenced by selection. However, measuring the fitness effects of variation in expression noise has proven difficult. This study explores the fitness impacts of altering the expression noise of the TDH3 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and finds that increases in expression noise can either benefit or harm fitness, depending on the average expression level of the genotype. Their computational model of gene expression in single cells also supports their empirical findings. The study expands on prior research by using mutant alleles of the TDH3 promoter to investigate the effects of altering both average expression level and expression noise independently. Overall, the study found that the wild type expression level of TDH3 is near an optimum for growth in the environment tested.
Aquatic insect larvae belonging to the family Blephariceridae use muscle-actuated suction organs to cling onto rocks in torrential alpine streams. These larvae are unique amongst insects in possessing this mechanism of attachment. The larvae's suction organs are covered by stiff, spine-like cuticular structures called microtrichia, which enable them to mould around large asperities to create an effective seal. The larvae's suction organs generate strong underwater attachments that are less affected by surface roughness than those of terrestrial climbing insects. The attachment performance of these larvae is described as "impressive" and capable of generating shear forces up to 1120 times their own body weight. Comparing the larvae's suction performance with other animals, such as cephalopods and lumpsucker fish, it is noted that they can generate suction stress of up to 101 kPa, making it a potential system for exploring biological suction mechanisms.
A new biogeochemical approach has been developed to track the biological origin of prehistoric mollusc shell, which were extensively used as a raw material for making ornaments in prehistoric times. The researchers conducted an in-depth study of archaeological ornaments using microstructural, geochemical and biomolecular analyses, including ‘palaeoshellomics’, the first application of palaeoproteomics to mollusc shells, to reveal the consistent use of locally-sourced freshwater mother-of-pearl for the standardized manufacture of ‘double-buttons’. The researchers argue that the presence of specific shell matrix proteins, supported not only by repeated low-complexity domains (RLC) but also by specific amino acids, is specific to freshwater unionoida, freshwater mother-of-pearl shells, which in combination with isotopic data, microstructural and amino acid results, exclude a marine origin for the raw material used to make the double buttons.
The article explores the idea that neuronal selectivity is optimized to represent features in the recent sensory past that best predict immediate future inputs. To test this hypothesis, simple feedforward neural networks were trained to predict the next few moments of video or audio in clips of natural scenes, and they developed receptive fields that closely matched those of real cortical neurons in different mammalian species, including temporal tuning properties. The better a network predicted future inputs, the more closely its receptive fields resembled those in the brain. This suggests that sensory processing is optimized to extract those features with the most capacity to predict future input, and that sensory inputs guide actions, but such actions necessarily lag behind these inputs due to delays caused by sensory transduction, axonal conduction, synaptic transmission, and muscle activation. The temporal prediction model provides a principled approach to understanding the temporal aspects of neural receptive fields.
Concentrative nucleoside transporters (CNTs) are involved in the cellular entry of nucleosides that serve as precursors to nucleic acids, signaling molecules, and nucleoside-derived drugs such as anticancer and antiviral agents. Understanding how CNTs recognize and import their substrates could lead to the development of more effective nucleoside-derived drugs. This document presents a combination of X-ray crystallographic and equilibrium-binding studies on the molecular origins of nucleoside and nucleoside drug selectivity of a CNT from Vibrio cholerae. The information obtained was then used to modify an anticancer drug so that it is better transported and selective for a single human CNT subtype. The study provides proof of principle for using transporter structural and functional information for the design of compounds that enter cells more efficiently and selectively.
The study examines the navigational decisions made by Paratrechina longicornis ants during cooperative transport of a large food item. The ants face limitations in their perception of the environment and the relevant information at the individual level may not coincide with collective requirements. The ants utilize a locally-blazed trail, which deviates from the classical notion of an ant trail, to achieve efficient navigation despite partial and misleading information. The study provides experimental and theoretical evidence to support the effectiveness of the locally-blazed trail in optimizing navigation in the context of cognitive and sensory limitations. The study also highlights the unique opportunity for studying conflicts between individual and collective knowledge in the cooperative transport behavior of ants.
Scientists trained monkeys to categorize visual cues in a delayed-match-to-spatial-category task while recording spikes and local field potentials from the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices (PFC and PPC). They found category-selective beta- and delta-band synchrony between and within areas, but also found delta synchrony and spiking activity reflected irrelevant stimulus dimensions. The results suggest that long-range beta-band synchrony could act as a filter that only supports neural representations of variables relevant to the task at hand. Furthermore, the study sheds light on the interactions within and between prefrontal and parietal cortices in executive brain functions.
Polymodal nociceptors are sensory neurons that respond to aversive stimuli with distinct physical properties. Drosophila larvae’s Class IV neurons are polymodal nociceptors responsible for thermal, mechanical and light sensation. Activation of Class IV neurons can provoke distinct avoidance behaviors, depending on the inputs. Scientists built a new measurement system that combines an infrared (IR) laser that can heat water and allows quantitatively controlled step-like and local heating with neuronal calcium imaging and extracellular single-unit recording to monitor firing patterns. In response to the local heating over 45°C, Class IV neurons showed unique firing patterns composed of intermittent pause periods after high-frequency firing trains. The firing pattern was associated with a large rise in Ca2+ in the entire dendritic tree, which was the Ca2+ transient. Both of these responses are physiological responses of Class IV neurons, and the response to noxious heat was compared to that to short-wavelength light to address the basis of the polymodal sensation. The precipitous fluctuation of firing rate in Class IV neurons enhanced the robust heat avoidance.
Researchers have demonstrated that keratinocytes play a critical role in the detection of innocuous and noxious touch in mice. Using optogenetic inhibition of keratinocytes, the researchers found that this decreased both behavioral and cellular mechanosensitivity. Further investigation revealed that ATP signaling was a key mediator of this process, and the release of ATP by keratinocytes served as a critical component of mammalian tactile sensation. This discovery lays an important foundation for further understanding the role of dysfunctional signaling in cutaneous pain and itch disorders and developing novel topical therapies for these conditions. Additionally, this study challenges the conventional notion that cutaneous sensory nerve terminals are the exclusive transducers of mechanical stimuli, suggesting that sensory neurons may collaborate with other cell types to initiate or amplify somatosensory signals.
The article explores the spatio-temporal dynamics of nitrogen-fixing bacteria and non-fixing bacteria during the symbiotic process in the Cupriavidus taiwanensis-Mimosa pudica system, and how ecological factors such as plant population size and nodulation cycle length can impact the spread of the nitrogen-fixation mutualistic trait. The research shows that N2-fixing symbionts progressively outcompete non-fixers within root nodules, leading to the emergence and stability of mutualism. The control of mutualism was found to act at the nodule cell scale and to occur relatively early, leading to an increase in mutualistic partners. The article also discusses mathematical models developed to simulate the fate of C. taiwanensis populations during nodulation in M. pudica plants, with simulations qualitatively matching the dynamics of bacterial populations observed experimentally.
Research on zebrafish skin has shown that scale development requires the interaction of several different signalling pathways, including Wnt/β-catenin, Ectodysplasin (Eda), and Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling. Live imaging shows that scale development follows an invariant sequence leading to a half-offset hexagonal grid on the fish's juvenile coat. Histological and ultrastructural studies indicate that scale morphogenesis begins with a bi-layered dermal papilla beneath the epidermis. The addition of skin appendage primordia and a tightly packed hexagonal grid are features of epidermal appendage development present in both amniotes and anamniote fishes, suggesting that these diverse appendage types are patterned by common mechanisms. Inhibiting Wnt/β-catenin signalling before papilla appearance prevents scale formation, showing that Wnt/β-catenin signalling is necessary for initiation. Compared to fish displaying normal scale development, fish lacking Ectodysplasin-A (Eda) signalling lack overt indications of scale morphogenesis and sp7:EGFP+ dermal Scale Forming Cells (dSFCs) in the skin, indicating that initiation and patterning of Wnt activity in the skin is Eda-independent.
A new algorithm has been developed that can reveal the coding capacity of non-classically responsive neurons in the auditory and frontal cortex of rats performing a frequency recognition task. These non-classically responsive neurons are typically difficult to interpret and are often neglected from analysis, making it challenging to connect neural activity to perception and behavior. The algorithm uses spike-timing-based Bayesian inference to assess the contribution of all recorded neurons to behavioral relevance on single trials, even when trial-averaged responses do not exhibit obvious task-modulation. The algorithm was used to compare coding schemes across different brain regions and revealed that both classically responsive and non-classically responsive cells contained significant information about sensory stimuli and behavioral decisions. The researchers suggest that this unbiased approach could be used to better understand the role of non-classically responsive neurons in behavior.
The article discusses the neurogenesis process in Drosophila, which occurs in two phases - embryonic and post
The gene regulatory network (GRN) is a critical decision-making module of a cell. The theory called Buffered Qualitative Stability (BQS) is based on the hypothesis that GRNs are organised to remain robust in the face of unpredictable environmental and evolutionary changes. The BQS theory makes strong and diverse predictions about the network features that enable stable responses under arbitrary perturbations, including the random addition of new connections. The theory has been verified through testing on the GRNs of E. coli, M. tuberculosis, P. aeruginosa, yeast, mouse, and humans. BQS provides conditions for evolvable robustness, explains many of the small and large-scale properties of GRNs, and highlights general features of transcriptional response. In contrast to healthy cells, a human cancer cell line's BQS is severely compromised, suggesting that the loss of BQS may underlie the phenotypic plasticity of cancer cells.
Researchers have developed Drosophila virilis as a new model system for studying duetting – a complex social behavior seen in many animal species, including insects, in which males and females tightly control the rate and timing of their courtship song syllables relative to each other. Previous studies of duetting have focused solely on acoustic interactions, but the researchers hypothesized that multisensory cues may also play a role in coordinating behavior between individuals. By manipulating sensory stimuli, quantifying behavioral responses and developing statistical models, the researchers showed that D. virilis females integrate auditory and tactile cues to drive song production and duetting. Tactile cues delivered to the abdomen and genitalia play a more important role than auditory cues for females, with precise timing of male tactile cues predicting female song timing, revealing a novel, non-acoustic mechanism for acoustic coordination. The researchers suggest that acoustic-duetting behaviors, which are under tight temporal control, might benefit from the use of multimodal sensory processing.
The study investigated whether presynaptic homeostatic plasticity (PHP) can be induced and expressed at specific synapses within a single motor neuron at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. The authors developed a genetic manipulation to reduce postsynaptic receptor expression in one of the two muscles innervated by a single motor neuron and found that PHP can be induced and expressed at a subset of synapses without influencing transmission at adjacent release sites. This suggests that PHP induction and expression mechanisms are locally transmitted and restricted to specific synaptic compartments. The study also demonstrated the specificity of the GluRIIA subunit in PHP regulation and showed that PHP can be induced and expressed exclusively at a subset of synapses within the same motor neuron without influencing neurotransmitter release at neighboring sites.
The protein Xer plays an important role in maintaining bacterial genomes by separating chromosome multipliers. However, little is known about how Xer works at a structural level. In this study, researchers used two high-resolution structures to analyse the pre- and post-cleavage synaptic intermediates in the Xer pathway. They found that large conformational changes and DNA bending are involved in activation of DNA strand cleavage and rejoining. The researchers also discovered that Xer relies on interaction with the cell division protein FtsK to license recombination at the septum. This discovery could help create a model for regulating recombination activity during cell division.
The response of multiple myeloma cells to bortezomib, a first-line therapy and proteasome inhibitor, was studied to better understand how cancer cells respond to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. The study used an integrated systems-level examination of transcription, translation, and proteolysis to examine these events central to cancer treatment. The experiment monitored four systems-level processes simultaneously in the same cellular population from transcription through protein production and proteolysis. The study found that despite robust transcriptional changes, only a few critical anti-apoptotic proteins were produced against a background of general translation inhibition. The results also supported co-targeting the anti-apoptotic regulator HSF1 to promote cell death by bortezomib. The study provides important insights into mechanisms of therapeutic resistance and novel methods to assess tumor response to chemotherapy.
Adolescents are more susceptible to drug addiction, but the biological basis of their increased vulnerability remains unclear. This study found that translational control by phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2α (p-eIF2α) accounts for adolescent hypersensitivity to cocaine. A low dose of cocaine reduced p-eIF2α in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) in adolescent mice, potentiated synaptic inputs to VTA dopaminergic neurons, and induced drug-reinforced behavior. Cocaine hijacks translational control by p-eIF2α, initiating synaptic potentiation and addiction-related behaviors, and may hold promise for new treatments for addiction.
Scientists have developed a method of testing whether tension in hair cell tip links opens mechanoelectrical-transduction channels during mechanoelectrical transduction by hair cells, which is responsible for converting mechanical information into electrical information in the auditory and vestibular (balance) systems of vertebrates. The hair cell hair bundle is comprised of actin-filled stereocilia and the top of each stereocilium is connected to the side of the tallest stereocilium via a protein filament called the tip link. The scientists engineered DNA tethers that link superparamagnetic beads to tip links, and were able to pull directly on bullfrog's sacculus tip links to evoke transduction currents from hair cells, confirming the hypothesis that tension in the tip links opens transduction channels. Previously, experiments were limited to the deflection of entire hair bundles as tip links are not readily accessible to experimental manipulation. This new method of applying mechanical force directly to the tip links opens up possibilities for experiments probing the mechanics of individual channels.
Researchers have found a small molecule that could prevent cancerous cell division by inhibiting site-specific O-glycosylation, according to a study in eLife. The Quinoline-based product directly binds and inhibits purified N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 3 (ppGalNAc-T3), a substance which encourages cancer cell invasiveness and glycan-masking of the phosphate and vitamin D controlling protein FGF23, a condition seen in kidney disease. The molecule, referred to as ppGalNAc-T3 Inhibitor 1, or "T3Inh-1", was found by testing 21,710 compounds for selective inhibitors of ppGalNAc-T3 , but not for ppGalNAc-T2, while using a cell-based fluorescence sensor.
A new study has identified a previously unknown mechanism that regulates protein synthesis essential for survival of leukemic cells. This mechanism involves the G-quadruplex structures contained in the genes that stimulate mRNA translation, which promotes survival of the leukemic cells. Scientists studying the genomes of human cancer cells have discovered that these structures may be quite common - implying characteristics that may make them a target for future drugs. By designing synthetic molecules that can interfere with G-quadruplex formation, researchers are then able to turn off the genes that allow cancer cells to multiply.
The Golgi cisterna is a prominent structure in eukaryotic cells that plays a central role in protein processing, sorting, and transport. The flat morphology of the cisterna is important for its function in regulating enzymatic reactions and facilitating the directional transport of newly synthesized proteins. However, the mechanisms and proteins involved in maintaining cisterna morphology and function are not yet fully understood. Recent research has suggested that sphingomyelin (SM) metabolism at the trans-Golgi membranes may regulate cisterna morphology by controlling the association of curvature-generating proteins. Experimental tests show that affecting SM homeostasis causes flat cisternae to become highly curled and dissociates membrane curvature-generating proteins. The release of these proteins leads to the destabilization of the flat cisterna configuration and triggers a morphological transition towards a curled configuration. The results suggest that the shape and function of the Golgi complex are maintained by a positive feedback loop between membrane curvature generators and cisterna morphology. Furthermore, the curling of the Golgi cisterna is a first-order transition, and the transition from a flat to a curled cisterna occurs abruptly.
Researchers have identified the first native prokaryotic voltage-dependent calcium channel (CavMr) that has selectivity for calcium ions. The channel was discovered to have a smaller number of negatively charged residues in its selectivity filter compared to artificial prokaryotic calcium channels. Mutational analysis showed that a glycine residue in the selectivity filter of CavMr is important for calcium selectivity, and that this residue is well conserved among subdomains I and III of eukaryotic calcium channels. The discovery of CavMr is expected to advance understanding of the evolution of voltage-dependent cation channels and the mechanisms of calcium recognition.
The amylase gene, which codes for a starch-digesting enzyme, has undergone gene copy number gains in humans, dogs, and mice, possibly due to increased starch consumption during the evolution of these species. The study aims to investigate the evolution of the amylase locus in mammals and how it correlates with diet and salivary gland-specific expression. The findings suggest that gene copy number amplification is a flexible and fast evolutionary mechanism that occurs independently in different branches of the phylogeny. The study also reveals that amylase activity in saliva is more widespread among mammals than previously thought, and salivary amylase activity in dog saliva varies from breed to breed.
This study focuses on building models of developing zebrafish spinal circuits and their connection to musculoskeletal models that replicate swimming movements. The study identifies possible mechanisms underlying developing zebrafish locomotion through the analysis of firing patterns and phase relationships. The models demonstrate how the site and the operation of rhythm generation could transition between coiling and swimming. The study also indicates the importance of contralateral excitation to multiple tail beats and allows estimate of spinal locomotor networks' sensitivity to motor command amplitude, synaptic weights, axon length, and firing behavior. The study concludes that these models will serve as valuable tools to test and further understand the operation of spinal circuits for locomotion.
A study explores the structure and cytotoxicity of protein segments comprising the amyloid spine of human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP), which is associated with type-II diabetes. Researchers discover that one segment, 19-29 S20G, forms pairs of β-sheets that are cytotoxic to pancreatic β-cells, while a second segment, 15-25 WT, forms non-toxic labile β-sheets. Both segments can seed full-length hIAPP, and cause it to take on cytotoxic and structural features of the respective segment. The study suggests that protein segments represent polymorphs of their parent protein and that segment 19-29 S20G may serve as a model for the toxic spine of hIAPP. Amyloid fibrils are associated with more than 25 diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and type-II diabetes.
This document discusses the ways in which non-canonical Wnt signaling regulates collective cell behavior during vascular morphogenesis. The researchers found that Wnt5a specifically activates Cdc42 at cell junctions downstream of ROR2 to reinforce coupling between adherens junctions and the actin cytoskeleton. They also discovered that Wnt5a signaling stabilizes vinculin binding to alpha-catenin, and that abrogation of vinculin in vivo and vitro leads to uncoordinated polarity and deficient sprouting angiogenesis. The study shows that collective cell behavior is regulated by non-canonical Wnt signaling and how it coordinates collective cell behavior during vascular morphogenesis by fine-tuning junctional mechanocoupling between endothelial cells. In vitro assays were used to measure endothelial collective cell behavior using axial polarity histograms, which demonstrated that Wnt5a signaling is necessary to coordinate the behavior of follower cells at the population level. In vivo, loss of non-canonical Wnt ligands leads to reduced sprouting efficiency. Their findings suggest that non-canonical Wnt signaling plays an important role in regulating collective cell behavior during vascular morphogenesis.
The Cricket Paralysis Virus (CrPV) uses an Internal Ribosomal Entry Site (CrPV-IRES) to manipulate and co-opt the host translational machinery for protein production. Researchers used single particle electron cryo-microscopy (cryoEM) to visualize two structures of double translocated CrPV-IRES with aminoacyl-tRNA in the peptidyl site (P site) of the ribosome, revealing a previously unseen conformation mimicking the acceptor stem of a canonical E site tRNA. The CrPV-IRES adopts a sophisticated use of molecular mimicry to tRNA and mRNA to hijack the ribosome, and the study suggests a mechanism for the positioning of the first aminoacyl-tRNA shared with the distantly related Hepatitis C Virus IRES. The paper provides a detailed view of how CrPV-IRES interacts with the ribosome and explains the movements of the large and small ribosomal subunits involved in early recruitment for translation initiation.
The structure and composition of the nucleosome that occupies the centromere in budding yeast, the genetic locus that organizes the proteinaceous kinetochore, has long been the subject of controversy. Conflicting structural models have been proposed, including conventional octameric nucleosomes, hemisomes, tetrasomes and mixed octasomes. To resolve this controversy, researchers have turned to an in vivo mapping method called H4S47C-anchored cleavage mapping, which determines the precise position and orientation of all histone H4 molecules in an unbiased manner. They find that cleavage patterns at centromeres are unique within the genome and are incompatible with symmetrical structures, including octameric nucleosomes and Cse4/H4 tetrasomes, and conflicts are only found with centromeres occupied by oppositely oriented Cse4/H4/H2A/H2B hemisomes, which indicates surprising flexibility in the orientation and phasing for the nucleosome.
Research shows that HIV evolves differently depending on the likelihood of developing drug resistance. In patients treated with highly effective therapies, the likelihood of resistance is lower and adaptation therefore proceeds through a hard selective sweep. Conversely, if resistance is likely or even expected, adaptation proceeds through a soft selective sweep where mutations spread simultaneously. The study used 6717 HIV-1 consensus sequences from patients treated with first-line therapies between 1989 and 2013 to confirm that the transition from fast to slow evolution of drug resistance was indeed accompanied with the expected transition from soft to hard selective sweeps.
Salmonella PhoQ is a histidine kinase that promotes virulence in Salmonella by detecting the macrophage phagosome. It is repressed by divalent cations and induced in environments of acidic pH, limited divalent cations, and cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMP). This study defined conformational changes in PhoQ PD (the periplasmic sensor domain) induced by acidic pH that suggest alpha-helices 4 and 5 contribute to pH sensing. The study engineered a disulfide bond between W104C and A128C in the PhoQ PD that restrains conformational flexibility in alpha-helices 4 and 5. The engineered strain proved to be virulent in mice, indicating that acidic pH and divalent cation sensing by PhoQ are dispensable for virulence. Salmonella enterica Typhimurium has multiple mechanisms, including the PhoQ sensor, to sense the phagosomal environment and respond by increasing their resistance to host antimicrobial factors. The study has established that acidic pH and divalent cation sensing are dispensable signals for PhoQ-mediated systemic virulence of Salmonella enterica Typhimurium, suggesting that CAMP or other host molecules facilitate PhoQ-dependent pathogenesis.
Ceapins, a class of pyrazole amides, have been discovered as selective inhibitors of ATF6α signaling, aiding in increased protein-folding capacity during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Ceapins appear to block ATF6α signaling by trapping it in ER-resident foci which are excluded from ER exit sites. The mechanism whereby ATF6α senses ER stress has remained a mystery since its discovery in 1998. By screening high-throughput cell-based screens, researchers have discovered that Ceapins inhibit selectively the processing of ATF6α by site-1 and site-2 proteases (S1P and S2P) in response to ER stress. Ceapins prevent selection of ATF6α into COPII vesicles by retaining it in foci in the ER membrane. Ceapin analogs induce rapid clustering of ATF6α, indicating that its oligomeric state plays a key role in regulating its trafficking and thereby activation in response to ER stress.
Recent discoveries of relatively intact macromolecular organic material in fossils challenge the traditional view that fossils lack original organic molecules. However, organic preservation versus contamination of dinosaur bone remains uncertain, as bone is a porous open system, allowing microbial and molecular flux. Reports of dinosaur peptide preservation are problematic for a host of reasons, including uncertain preservation timeframes, the existence of deep microorganisms, and fossil bone's open system nature. Chemical and molecular analysis, alongside aseptic protocols, of Late Cretaceous surface-eroded and excavated subterranean dinosaur bones, when compared with associated sediment controls, show evidence for a contemporary microbiome inside the dinosaur bones. These findings suggest that bones not only act as open systems immediately after death and exhumation but also create favorable habitats as fossils underground.
The article discusses generative models of perception, which theorize that perception is a combination of sensory input and prior prediction, each weighted by their precision with incongruence between these resulting in prediction error or surprise. The article focuses on direct evidence for such a system and the physiological basis of its computations. Researchers used an auditory stimulus whose pitch value changed according to specific rules to separate the three key computational variables of surprise, prediction error, and prediction precision. Using direct recordings from human auditory cortex, they discovered that the surprise due to prediction violations is encoded by local field potential oscillations in the gamma band, changes to predictions in the beta band, and the precision of predictions appears to quantitatively relate to alpha band oscillations. The findings confirm oscillatory codes for critical aspects of generative models. The study also suggests that perception is based on internal generative models of the environment which are constantly updated based on experience.
Researchers have located the progenitor cells and molecular factors driving neurogenesis in Octopus vulgaris embryos using histological techniques. They found an important pool of progenitors, expressing transcription factors, located outside the central brain cords in the lateral lips adjacent to the eyes, suggesting that newly formed neurons migrate into the cords. This finding shows that octopus newborn neurons migrate over long distances, reminiscent of vertebrate neurogenesis, which might be a fundamental strategy for large brain development. The study also visualized the anatomy of brain development in 3D using light sheet microscopy and studied the expression of several transcription factors, proliferation and neural markers, which revealed the spatial and temporal pattern of O. vulgaris brain development from stage IX onwards.
The concept of brain age, which is used to measure brain health and quantify deviations from a normative aging trajectory, has been tested to determine whether cross-sectional brain age delta reflects ongoing neurobiological aging processes. Two independent datasets were used to test the assumption that higher-than-expected brain age reflects an above-average rate of brain aging. However, the study found no significant association between cross-sectional brain age and the rate of brain change measured longitudinally. Instead, brain age in adulthood was found to be associated with congenital factors, such as birth weight and polygenic scores of brain age, which reflect lifelong influence on brain structure from early life. Thus, longitudinal imaging data should be preferred when studying individual change trajectories in brain and cognition during the aging process, rather than relying on cross-sectional indices of the aging brain.
Ribosome biogenesis, a complex and energy-demanding process, requires tight coordination of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and ribosomal protein (RP) production. Alteration of any step in the ribosome assembly process may impact growth by leading to proteotoxic stress. Heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) emerged as a central regulator of proteostasis, but how its activity is coordinated with ribosome biogenesis is unknown. A novel regulatory pathway, the Ribosomal Assembly Stress Response (RASTR), allows rapid and simultaneous up-regulation of protein homeostasis genes and down-regulation of RP genes following disruption of various steps in ribosome biogenesis. RASTR requires neo-synthesis of RPs following stress and is linked to the accumulation of RP aggregates. The transcriptional response to disruptions in ribosome assembly involves the activation of a specific signaling pathway that is restricted.
A new study has found that the aging auditory cortex has decreased selectivity to temporal information such as speech comprehension and conspecific vocalizations. The study used fMRI to model the hemodynamic response to natural sounds in 64 listeners of varying ages and found that the loss of temporal selectivity was most prominent in the primary auditory cortex and planum temporale. The broadening of temporal tuning may underlie the difficulties older adults experience in speech comprehension in noisy environments. The study suggests that age-related hearing loss is not always due to peripheral declines in auditory coding but can also involve central levels of auditory processing.
Thalamic axons need to form synaptic connections, despite the abundance of intracortical projections, during cortical synaptic development. The role of astrocyte-secreted protein hevin in synaptic connectivity was studied, and it was found that hevin is required for normal thalamocortical synaptic connectivity in the mouse cortex. The absence of hevin results in a long-lasting reduction in thalamocortical synapses and a transient increase in intracortical excitatory connections. Dendritic spines often receive multiple excitatory inputs, with the majority of the spines receiving simultaneous thalamic and cortical inputs; this proportion diminishes as the brain develops but remains abundant in Hevin-null mice. Through secretion of hevin, astrocytes control an important developmental synaptic refinement process at dendritic spines. Thalamocortical and intracortical connections primarily contain either vesicular glutamate transporter-1 (VGlut1) or VGlut2 in their presynaptic terminals, respectively. The cellular and molecular mechanisms through which thalamocortical connections are established and maintained have yet to be elucidated. Astrocytes also help maintain thalamic inputs onto cortical neurons and facilitate the resolution of singly-innervated spines.
A study using mice suggests that myelin content in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is a critical determinant of social behavior, as it is significantly reduced in mice that display a social avoidance behavior, while restored myelin formation leads to a return of normal social behavior. This study can provide important insights on susceptibility or resilience to social stress and affective disorders, such as depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. Furthermore, these results indicate the potential for treating depression and other mood disorders by promoting the formation of new myelin, or oligodendrocytes, in the mPFC.
Researchers have used NMR spectroscopy to study the sidechain dynamics of the human A2A adenosine receptor and its response to different ligands. The work, reported in Science Advances, creates a framework for future exploration of how different regions of the receptor can respond. The process uses highly deuterated (except at particular 1H/13C NMR probes) wild-type G protein-coupled receptors to generate samples to be studied. The resulting data indicate that low levels of sodium are required to allow large agonist-induced structural changes in A2AR.

The article discusses the use of deep mutational scanning to quantify influenza's mutational tolerance and contributing factors to its antigenic evolution. The study created mutant viruses in which most of the possible amino acid mutations to the virus’s hemagglutinin were incorporated, and their mutation frequencies were quantified through deep sequencing. It was found that the virus’s hemagglutinin had a high inherent tolerance for mutations at antigenic sites, contributing to its ability to evade immunity and rapidly evolve. The study also used new PCR-based techniques to introduce random codon mutations into full-length genes to create mutant libraries of the virus’s hemagglutinin. These libraries were used to generate pools of mutant influenza viruses that were then passaged to select for functional variants. Through deep sequencing, the frequency of each mutation before and after selection was quantified to assess the impact of all possible amino-acid mutations.
Histones, which are normally bound to the nucleus, have been found to be stored within cells in lipid droplets, where they can act as an antibacterial defense system. The histones are sequestered on droplets under normal conditions, but in response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide or lipoteichoic acid, they are released and are able to kill bacteria efficiently in vitro. The histones in lipid droplets also function in vivo. When introduced into Drosophila embryos lacking histones bound to lipid droplets, bacterial growth increased rapidly whereas in embryos with histones bound, bacterial growth decreased. It was also found that histones on lipid droplets give embryos and adult flies a survival advantage. It may be possible that this intracellular antibacterial defense system also functions in mice. Ultimately, the bactericidal activity of the lipid droplets is due to the histones, which have been shown to be bactericidal in vitro since Hirsch’s discovery in 1958.
A study by scientists from New York University shows that hyperplasia of muscle stem cells (satellite cells or SCs) can accelerate tissue regeneration and maintain regenerative capacity. The study, which focused on the role of the TEAD1, found that its overexpression led to a significant increase in the number of quiescent SCs, which in turn promoted faster regeneration after injury. The study also showed that the increase in SCs was consistent in different mouse lines, and confirmed there were no overt pathological changes or alterations to muscle size.
The positioning of nucleosomes in chromatin has significant effects on gene expression, but the mechanisms leading to precise nucleosome locations in cells are still being defined. A group of enzymes known as ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling proteins (ChRPs) play a role in dynamically establishing nucleosome positioning. The Isw2 enzyme has been previously defined as a genome-wide, nonspecific nucleosome spacing factor, but new research shows that Isw2 instead acts as an obligately targeted nucleosome remodeler in vivo through physical interactions with sequence-specific factors. This interaction orients Isw2 on target nucleosomes, allowing for precise nucleosome positioning at targeted loci. The findings suggest an 'interacting barrier model' where Isw2 interacts with a sequence-specific factor to accurately and reproducibly position a single, targeted nucleosome to define the precise border of phased chromatin arrays.
Researchers have discovered a second molecule involved in the immune system’s process for presenting information about peptides on the surface of cells. The molecule, known as TAPBPR, is a chaperone that functions as a catalyst for peptide dissociation from MHC class I molecules, enhances the loading of peptide-receptive MHC I molecules, and can discriminate between peptides based on affinity. The molecule is now believed to work alongside tapasin, another peptide editor, in controlling peptide presentation. The discovery could have implications for improving the recognition of tumour cells.
Researchers have developed a new assay to monitor activity in ammonium transporters in vivo using fluorescent proteins. By inserting circularly-permutated GFP into conformation-sensitive positions of two plant and one yeast ammonium transceptors, the team was able to develop sensors that monitored the interaction of the transporters with their substrates, the activity of transporters, and their regulation in vivo. This is particularly valuable in the context of analytes for which no radiotracers exist, as well as for cell-specific and subcellular transport processes that are otherwise difficult to track.
Researchers have presented a method to quantitatively measure the fraction of NDC80 complexes bound to microtubules at individual kinetochores in living human cells, which are required for error-free chromosome segregation. The study found that NDC80 binding is modulated in a chromosome autonomous fashion over prometaphase and metaphase, and is predominantly regulated by centromere tension. The tension dependency requires phosphorylation of the N-terminal tail of Hec1 and the proper localization of Aurora B kinase. The study leads to a mathematical model of the molecular basis of tension-dependent NDC80 binding to kinetochore microtubules in vivo. Accurate chromosome segregation is believed to result from a process that actively suppresses potential errors, and this study provides understanding on the regulation of the attachment of microtubules to chromosomes.
The article discusses the challenges of Hedgehog (Hh) morphogen transport from producing to distant responding cells during cell fate determination during development. Hh morphogens are synthesized as terminally lipidated molecules that form insoluble clusters at the surface of producing cells. The crucial step of Hh relay from producing cells to receptors on remote responding cells remains unresolved. The study shows that Hh relay and direct patterning of the 3–4 intervein region strictly depend on proteolytic removal of lipidated N-terminal membrane anchors. Palmitoylated membrane anchors restrict morphogen spread until site-specific processing switches membrane-bound Hh into bioactive forms with specific patterning functions. The study uses wing development in Drosophila melanogaster as a model.
PP2A-B56 is a phosphatase complex that regulates important mitotic processes in cells. Different isoforms of B56 are responsible for specific functions, with some localizing to the centromere and others to the kinetochore. Sgo1 and BubR1 help to anchor PP2A-B56 at these locations, with Sgo2 interacting specifically with centromeric isoforms and BubR1 interacting with kinetochore isoforms. B56 alpha and gamma were found to support different functions at the centromere and kinetochore. The differential localization of B56 isoforms is not fully understood, as the binding partners BubR1 and Sgo1 do not show specificity for a particular isoform. Sgo2 was found to be more important than Sgo1 in recruiting B56 to the centromere, and the authors propose that other, as yet unidentified, factors may play a role in isoform-specific localization.
Researchers have discovered that rod- and cone-mediated responses interact non-linearly to control the responses of primate retinal ganglion cells, and this asymmetry is also evident in human perception. Retinal circuits provide an opportunity to link the mechanism of parallel pathways and perception. Previous studies have provided clear predictions as to where the interaction between the two stem from, and here researchers show that this occurs upstream of the cone bipolar-to-retinal ganglion cell synapse. This programming of the interaction shapes circuit output and perception.
The study investigates the role of ecological factors in the emergence of chimpanzee tool use at the individual level. The researchers analyse data from a long-term field experiment, the honey-trap experiment, in which 52 individuals of the Sonso community of Budongo Forest were exposed to a novel foraging task that could only be solved with a tool. The study finds that travel fosters tool use in wild chimpanzees and may also have been a driving force in early hominin technological evolution. The research sheds light on the different ecological hypotheses and contributes to a unifying model of the emergence of tool use.
Platinum chemotherapy resistance, gene copy number alterations and tumor cell stemness contribute to the recurrence of high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC), the most prevalent histologic tumor subtype. Stem phenotypes involving Wnt-β-catenin, intrinsic platinum resistance, and tumorsphere formation are here associated with spontaneous gains in Kras, Myc and FAK genes in a new aggressive murine model of ovarian cancer. Adhesion-independent FAK signaling sustained KMF and human tumorsphere proliferation as well as resistance to cisplatin cytotoxicity. Increased FAK tyrosine phosphorylation was observed within HGSOC patient tumors surviving neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Combining a FAK inhibitor with platinum overcame chemoresistance and triggered cell apoptosis.
The brain uses past experiences to generate expectations about future events, and anticipation and prediction are ubiquitous in the brain. However, most studies examining anticipatory signals have tested anticipation based on memory for relatively simple associations between pairs of discrete stimuli. To address this, the authors examined how the brain anticipates event boundaries in familiar sequences of actions. They used a naturalistic narrative stimulus— a movie clip—from The Grand Budapest Hotel, in which regularities are present at multiple timescales. They examined brain activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while individuals watched the movie clip six times. Using a hidden Markov model applied to searchlights across the whole brain, they identified temporal shifts between activity patterns evoked by the first vs. repeated viewings of the clip. In many regions throughout the cortex, neural activity patterns for repeated viewings shifted to precede those of initial viewing by up to 15 s. The hierarchy persisted and varied along a posterior-to-anterior temporal hierarchy, with progressively higher-order regions anticipating events that are further in the future compared to lower-order regions. These results demonstrate a hierarchy of anticipatory signals in the human brain and link them to subjective experiences of events.
The visual system must discount the component of retinal patterns that occur as a result of eye or head movements in order to perceive the world accurately. The brain typically requires efference copies of self-generated eye/head movements to accomplish this, however, there may be an alternative solution where retinal velocity patterns themselves are used to dissociate translations from rotations. The visual system utilises both local motion parallax cues and global perspective distortions to estimate heading in the presence of rotations. The study provides evidence that a subpopulation of neurons utilises visual cues to signal heading in a rotation-invariant fashion, suggesting multi-sensory combination of both visual and non-visual cues in representing rotations.
The intermediate filaments (IFs) in human cells are necessary for cell shape, motility, and signal transduction. Dysregulation of IFs can lead to various diseases. The regulation of IF structure and function remains poorly understood, but recent evidence suggests that post-translational modification (PTM) is involved. O-GlcNAcylation is an intracellular form of glycosylation observed in many IF proteins. Glycosylation changes have been implicated in physiological and pathological functions of IFs. Vimentin, a prototypical IF protein, is required for cell migration by mediating protein-protein interactions. There is a correlation between vimentin O-GlcNAcylation and the invasive potential of epithelial cancers. A study suggests that vimentin glycosylation is co-opted by an intracellular bacterial pathogen to produce a replicative niche. The study suggests that O-GlcNAcylation may play an important role in dynamic regulation of the IF cytoskeleton in homeostasis and disease.
The study focuses on understanding the genetic mechanisms involved in the pattern formation of Drosophila, particularly in the maintenance and renewal of patterns over the larval moult cycles. The researchers track marked cells and find out how their identities change to compensate and maintain the pattern through repositioning and alteration of their neighbors. The study also compares the arrangement of epithelial cells between embryos and larvae and how cells rearrange, converge in the midline, and extend in the anteroposterior axis during the transition from L1 to L2 larval stages. The shape and proportion of cells change during the transition from embryo to larva, but the cuticular pattern remained consistent throughout all larval stages.
The document discusses the activation and signaling pathways of the neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase RET, which is critical in the development of enteric, sensory, autonomic, and motor neurons, as well as in diseases such as Hirschsprung's disease and various human carcinomas. The document focuses on the physiological functions of trans RET signaling in rapidly adapting (RA) mechanoreceptors in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs), which express RET and the co-receptor Gfrα2 and depend on RET for survival and central projection growth. The results suggest that combinatorial cis and trans RET signaling promote survival and central projection growth of RA mechanoreceptors in vivo. The document also explores the expression patterns of RET signaling components in the developing spinal cord (SC) and DRGs, providing insight into RET signaling in RA mechanoreceptors in vivo. Finally, the document discusses the mechanisms by which cis and trans RET signaling occur and their potential biological outcomes.
The document describes a new method for mapping the connections between neurons in neural tissue at a molecular level. Specifically, the authors used serial multiplex immunogold labeling (siGOLD) and serial-section transmission electron microscopy (ssTEM) to map peptidergic neurons in the annelid Platynereis. This approach allows for the direct overlaying of chemical neuromodulatory maps onto synaptic connectomic maps, providing a more comprehensive understanding of nervous system function. The authors demonstrated the scalability of siGOLD by using 11 neuropeptide antibodies on a full-body larval ssTEM dataset. They also reconstructed a peptidergic circuitry comprising the sensory nuchal organs, found by siGOLD to express pigment-dispersing factor, a circadian neuropeptide. Overall, siGOLD enables the direct assignment of molecular identities to neurons, enriching our understanding of circuit function.
Malate and lactate dehydrogenases (MDH and LDH) are metabolic enzymes with strict specificity for their substrates. In the Apicomplexa, an unusual LDH evolved from MDH via convergent evolution, producing a difference in specificity exceeding 12 orders of magnitude. This study shows that apicomplexan LDH evolved via neofunctionalization characterized by long-range epistasis, a promiscuous intermediate, and few gain-of-function mutations of large effect. Specificity switched via an insertion that shifted the position and identity of the ‘specificity residue’ to Trp107f. This work provides an unprecedented atomic-resolution view of evolutionary trajectories creating a nascent enzymatic function.
Shoot outgrowths from plant stems depend on the formation of epidermal sites of cell polarity convergence with high intracellular auxin at their centre. A new study shows that centres of PIN1 polarity convergence develop within a proximodistally oriented polarity field prior to outgrowth emergence. The study also shows that AUX/LAX importer genes are required for normal outgrowth development and that expression of auxin biosynthetic enzymes tends to be elevated in regions of polarity divergence. It is believed that both expression patterns are required for normal outgrowth emergence and may form part of a common module underlying shoot outgrowths.
Calcium ions play a vital role in various cellular signaling mechanisms and predominantly enter the cytosol through voltage-gated calcium channels. However, a new study has highlighted that calcium ions also enter through voltage-gated sodium channels in the mammalian axons of rats. The findings suggest that the contribution of the sodium channel is a rapid and submillisecond entry route for calcium ions in NaV-enriched domains located in the axon initial segment. Calcium ions regulate processes ranging from gene expression to fast transmitter release in the cytosol, and therefore, this discovery of an additional entry route in mammalian axons could have significant implications for cell signaling mechanisms. Additionally, the study employed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from neurons to examine the spatial profile of calcium ions' concentration and found that activity-dependent [Ca2+]i transients are highly compartmentalized in the axon initial segment and nodes of Ranvier.
Parasitic helminths, which infect over a billion humans, require an unusual anaerobic metabolism for survival in low oxygen environments, which depends on the electron carrier, rhodoquinone (RQ). RQ synthesis, which is not made or used by any parasitic hosts, is a potential target for anthelmintics. However, little is known about how RQ is made and no drugs are known to block RQ synthesis. A new study has used Caenorhabditis elegans genetics to show that tryptophan degradation via the kynurenine pathway is required to generate the key amine-containing precursors for RQ synthesis. In addition, C. elegans requires RQ for survival in hypoxic conditions and a high throughput assay has been established for drugs that block RQ-dependent metabolism, which may drive the development of a new class of anthelmintic drugs. This study is a key first step in understanding how RQ is made in parasitic helminths. C. elegans is an appropriate genetic model for this study as it can make RQ and uses RQ-dependent metabolism when unable to use oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor, which allows for high throughput drug screens.
This document discusses the use of single-cell RNA sequencing and chromatin analysis to study the heterogeneity and specificity of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) responses to external stimuli, such as interferons, growth factors, and prostaglandins. The researchers performed in vivo pharmacological perturbations on HSCs and used scATAC-Seq to study their chromatin states. They found that unperturbed HSCs exist in fluent transcriptional states and identified six HSC states that are characterized by enrichment of marker genes. External signals induced rapid transitions between HSC states, but transcriptional response varied both between external stimulants and within the HSC population for a given perturbation. The study provides a comprehensive description of the in vivo single-cell transcriptomic and epigenetic landscape of HSCs and multipotent LSK progenitors in response to common external stressors.
The document describes the creation of a fully synthetic phage display library of humanized llama single domain antibodies (NaLi-H1) for the purpose of obtaining highly functional antibodies at lower cost without animal immunization. The library was screened against various targets and selected antibodies were shown to be functional intrabodies enabling tracking or inhibition of endogenous targets. The nanobody scaffold also allowed for specific protein knockdown in living cells. The document also discusses the advantages of single domain antibodies, the development of a single domain antibody library enriched in highly stable and functional antibody fragments, and the diversity design of the NaLi-H1 library.
The article discusses the potential mechanism by which microsatellite expansions in genes can lead to neurodegenerative disorders. Specifically, the researchers focused on the GGGGCC repeat RNA associated with ALS/FTD and its localization to neuritic granules in cultured mammalian spinal cord neurons. The presence of the GGGGCC repeat RNA correlated with neuronal branching defects and localization to granules that labeled with fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), a transport granule component. Additionally, the researchers used a Drosophila GGGGCC expansion disease model to characterize dendritic branching defects and found that they were modulated by FMRP and Orb2. The human orthologs of these modifiers were misregulated in induced pluripotent stem cell-differentiated neurons (iPSNs) from GGGGCC expansion carriers. These findings suggest that expanded repeat RNAs may interact with the messenger RNA transport and translation machinery, causing transport granule dysfunction and contributing to the neuronal defects associated with C9orf72 and other microsatellite expansion diseases.
LAMP1 and LAMP2 proteins, which line the lysosome limiting membrane, protect it from lysosomal hydrolase action, and may signal cholesterol availability by tightly binding cholesterol and NPC1 and NPC2 proteins that export cholesterol from lysosomes. LAMP2 deficiency causes Danon’s disease, an X-linked hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, while its expression enhances tissue function in models of aging. Additionally, LAMP2 is needed for chaperone-mediated autophagy. LAMP proteins, especially LAMP2, play a direct role in cholesterol export from lysosomes, and LAMPs’ lumenally oriented cholesterol binding sites represent a significant binding site for cholesterol in lysosomes. The ten-fold higher abundance of LAMP proteins compared to NPC1 protein in HeLa cells suggests that LAMP proteins may play additional roles in addition to facilitating NPC1 function in cholesterol export. LAMP2 binds tightly to the N-terminal domain of NPC1 and also binds cholesterol with the same orientation as that domain, and LAMP2 also contributes to cholesterol export from lysosomes. NPC2 can deliver cholesterol to NPC1 and LAMP2, which helps drive the cholesterol export process by moving cholesterol from accumulated, lumenal lipid stores to the lysosome's limiting membrane. In the future, it will be important to elucidate precisely how LAMP2 interacts with both NPC2 and NPC1 to facilitate cholesterol export from lysosomes and how cholesterol binding contributes to LAMP2’s other cellular roles.
Ribosomes can stall during translation, leading to the production of incomplete proteins. The Ribosome-associated Quality control Complex (RQC) engages stalled ribosomes and targets nascent polypeptides for proteasomal degradation. In this study, the authors demonstrate that key RQC activities – Ltn1p-dependent ubiquitination and Rqc2p-mediated Carboxy-terminal Alanine and Threonine (CAT) tail elongation – can be recapitulated in vitro with a yeast cell-free system. They determined that CAT tailing is mechanistically distinct from canonical translation and that Ltn1p-mediated ubiquitination depends on the poorly characterized RQC component Rqc1p. These findings establish a novel system to study the RQC and provide a framework for understanding how RQC factors coordinate their activities to facilitate clearance of incompletely synthesized proteins.
Researchers have proposed a method to measure tumor immunogenicity score (TIGS), which combines tumor mutational burden (TMB) and an expression signature of the antigen processing and presenting machinery (APM). The TIGS could be used as a biomarker to identify patients who are more likely to respond to immunotherapy. The combination of TMB and APM signature improves the accuracy of predicting immunotherapy response. The study found that TIGS represents a novel and effective tumor-inherent biomarker for the prediction of immunotherapy response.
Researchers have discovered how cytoplasmic dynein’s motor activity is regulated by the dynein regulator Lis1, which is necessary for cell division, intracellular transport, and brain development. Using three-dimensional electron microscopy and other tools, the researchers found that Lis1 blocks the progression of mechanochemical cycle, which induces a persistent microtubule-bound state for the dynein motor. Mutations in the Lis1 gene have been linked to lissencephaly, a neurodevelopmental disorder.
DNA replication can result in incorrect nucleotides being incorporated into the new DNA strand, leading to mutations. To prevent this, DNA replication is followed by DNA mismatch repair (MMR), which starts with a MutS homolog recognizing a mismatch and undergoing an ATP-dependent transformation to a sliding clamp state. This sliding clamp state is recognized by MutL, which activates downstream repair. The authors present a crystal structure of the MutS/MutL complex using a site-specifically crosslinked complex and examine how large conformational changes lead to activation of MutL. Their work explains how the sliding clamp promotes loading of MutL onto DNA to activate downstream effectors, and elucidates a crucial mechanism that ensures that MMR is initiated only after detection of a DNA mismatch. Defects in MMR result in a mutator phenotype and in humans, predisposition for cancer. Understanding the mechanism is important for maintaining genomic stability.
The let-7 microRNA family performs a tumour suppressive role that can compromise regeneration, while demonstrating that distinct levels can mediate desirable phenotypes, according to a study of mice published in eLife Sciences. The study found that chronic, high-dose let-7 overexpression appeared to cause liver damage and degeneration which led to tumour growth. The researchers said that their findings rationalise the tight regulation of let-7 microRNA in development and have important implications for let-7 based therapies.

The document discusses kinesin-1, a motor protein that facilitates the unidirectional transport of intracellular cargo along microtubule filaments through ATP-driven, dimeric movement. The role of the neck linker (NL), which connects the two heads of the kinesin-1 dimer, in the regulation of stepping is examined through various NL mutants of different lengths. Results indicate that kinesin-1 is mainly front-head gated, with NL length enhancing unidirectional processivity and velocity. The general gating framework based on mechanical states of dimeric motors is also presented, which can be applied to other processive, two-headed motors. The quantitative contribution of each of the three gating properties to maintaining unidirectional processivity is also assessed.
The document discusses the flaws in pre-clinical research methodologies that lead to biased measurement of treatment effects. The paper focuses on sunitinib pre-clinical studies and the relationship between the study design and experimental tumor size response. The research shows limited use of practices to address internal validity threats, with no experiments using blinded outcome assessment. The study reveals that design and reporting standards represent an opportunity for improving clinical inference. The research also talks about the importance of preclinical research in formulating clinical hypotheses and establishing the ethical basis for exposing patients to a new substance. However, the paper suggests that preclinical research is plagued by poor design and reporting practices.
The identity of the potassium channel of human spermatozoa (hKSper) has been unknown until now. A recent study by eLife Journal discovered that the Slo1 protein constitutes a major potassium channel of human spermatozoa. This is important because potassium channels regulate membrane potential and cell motility of sperm, thus are essential to normal sperm physiology. Human IKSper responses to intracellular calcium but not intracellular alkalinization. The Slo1 ion channel is the molecular determinant for hKSper. The Slo1 is inhibited by progesterone. Inhibition of hKSper by progesterone may depolarize the spermatozoon to open the calcium channel CatSper, thus raising calcium to produce hyperactivation and allowing fertilization of an oocyte. Mammalian sperm gain competence as they travel through the female reproductive tract. This process is accompanied by an elevation of sperm intracellular calcium and a membrane hyperpolarization.
The article discusses the thermal range in which all organisms live and how the mechanisms setting the limits of this range are not well understood. The researchers studied cellular features in Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae embryos, which exhibited signature changes at the thermal limits. The study hypothesizes that the changes were due to restricted aerobic capacity at thermal limits. The researchers found that relative respiration in C. elegans embryos decreases at the thermal limits as compared to within the thermal range. Furthermore, by compromising components of the respiratory chain, the researchers demonstrated that the reliance on aerobic metabolism is reduced at thermal limits, and embryos thus compromised exhibited signature changes in size and shape already within the thermal range. The thermal range defined as >90% embryonic viability was narrower than the reproductive range for C. elegans and C. briggsae. The study identified cellular features that operate differently beyond the thermal limits compared to within the thermal range. Moreover, the article suggests that thermal limits could be characterized by further changes in cell size and potentially cell shape, in an attempt to increase the available surface area and thus maximize oxygen availability.
A new, fully articulated skeleton of the early branching ornithischian dinosaur Heterodontosaurus tucki has been described, revealing a suite of novel postcranial features unknown in any other ornithischian, with implications for the early evolution of the group. These features include a large, anteriorly projecting sternum, bizarre, paddle-shaped sternal ribs, and a full gastral basket – the first recovered in Ornithischia. These unusual anatomical traits provide key information on the evolution of the ornithischian body plan and suggest functional shifts in the ventilatory apparatus occurred close to the base of the clade. The osteology of H. tucki has been described elsewhere, but this paper focuses on novel anatomical features preserved in the new specimen.
The article discusses the use of quorum-sensing receptors from Vibrio harveyi as membrane anchors for class III adenylate cyclases (ACs). The authors show that a chimera made from the AC Rv1625c and the quorum-sensing receptor CqsS can be directly regulated by the QS-ligand cholera-autoinducer CAI-1. This suggests that 6TM AC membrane domains may have a receptor function, which adds a new dimension to the potential regulation of class III AC activity. The article also discusses the different classes of ACs, and the biochemical and genetic identification of these enzymes.
A new avialan species, Alcmonavis poeschli, has been discovered in the Solnhofen Archipelago in southern Germany. The specimen was found in the Lower Tithonian Mörnsheim Formation and is identified as a more derived avialan than the famous urvogel Archaeopteryx. It shows modifications that indicate an increased adaptation for active flapping flight in the early evolution of birds. The Solnhofen Archipelago is famous for its well-preserved fossils, including Archaeopteryx, and is part of the Weißjura Group of mainly calcareous marine sediments widely distributed in Bavaria and Baden-Württemberg. The discovery suggests there was higher avialan diversity in the Late Jurassic than previously realized. The specimen has been named the “Mühlheim specimen” and is the 13th urvogel specimen to be identified from the area. The taxonomic identity of the specimen is difficult due to the similarity of the forelimbs of many non-ornithothoracan paravians, and the fact that the specimen is much larger than any other Archaeopteryx specimen.
Photorhabdus is a bacterium that lives in a symbiotic relationship with insecticidal nematodes and is used as a biological agent to control crop pests. It produces a variety of toxins and molecules to kill insects and preserve insect cadavers as a food source for the nematodes. The Photorhabdus Virulence Cassettes (PVCs) are a delivery mechanism for diverse protein toxins that can act independently at a distance from the bacteria itself. The PVC needle complex associated toxin Pnf disrupts the cytoskeleton and is a Rho-GTPase. The PVC system can act at a distance and requires no intimate contact between bacteria and host cells. Different PVC operons encode varying effector genes, with a range of predicted activities. The PVC-like nano-syringes may have significant ecological and perhaps biomedical significance.
Repeated social defeat stress in rats enhances long-term potentiation (LTP) of NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic transmission in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and increases the sensitivity of IP3Rs, which underlies LTP facilitation. Defeated rats also display enhanced learning of contextual cues paired with cocaine experience assessed using a conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm. These findings suggest that enhanced glutamatergic plasticity in the VTA may contribute to increased addiction vulnerability following repeated stressful experiences, including the learning of cue-drug/reward associations. Humans with a history of stressful or traumatic experiences are more prone to develop substance use disorders.
Researchers have developed a new method called 'MinION sketching' that can quickly and inexpensively re-identify human DNA with a high degree of accuracy, allowing for near real-time applications. The method requires as little as three minutes of sequencing and 60-300 random SNPs to re-identify a sample. The method can be used for periodic cell line and tissue authentication in research and clinical settings, and is considerably faster than current methods, potentially minimizing the amount of irreproducible research caused by mix-ups and contamination in human cell and tissue cultures. The method also shows promise for cancer cell line authentication.
Cellulosomal cohesin-dockerin (Coh-Doc) pairs interact through redundant dual binding modes, which consist of two distinct conformations instead of the usual lock and key mechanism. This paper examines the binding mechanisms of Coh:Doc complexes under force using site-directed mutagenesis and single-molecule force spectroscopy. The study uses wild-type and quadruple Doc mutants to validate the approach and shows that distinct differences in the mechanical properties of the two binding modes indicate that the wild-type Doc from Clostridium thermocellum populates both binding modes with similar probabilities. Understanding the dual binding mode could help in designing systems for protein nanoassembly.
Researchers have discovered a novel cellular sensing mechanism that controls biofilm formation in Bacillus subtilis. The mechanism operates without the involvement of a dedicated RNA or protein, and instead, certain serine codons in the gene for the biofilm repressor SinR cause a decrease of SinR levels under biofilm-inducing conditions. The researchers propose that specific serine codons in the SinR mRNA act as a simple sensor for monitoring, and triggering a response to, serine depletion under biofilm-inducing conditions. The study found that ribosome density was higher at UCN codons than at AGC or AGU during biofilm formation, and serine starvation replicated the effect of biofilm-inducing conditions on ribosome occupancy and SinR production. The researchers suggest the reduced translation speed at serine codons may be exploited by other microbes in adapting to stationary phase.
The p53 family member TAp63α plays a key role in maturing mammalian oocytes that are arrested in the dictyate stage of meiotic prophase I. This protein is kept in an inactive and exclusively dimeric state but is activated upon detection of DNA damage, leading to apoptosis. Activation follows a spring-loaded mechanism and is associated with unfolding of the inhibitory structure that blocks the tetramerization interface. The TAp63α dimer is a kinetically trapped state and activation does not require further translation of other cellular factors in oocytes. TAp63α plays a crucial role in maintaining genetic quality in germ cells and acts as the key quality control factor in maternal reproduction.
The document reports on the interactions between toll-like receptors (TLRs) and sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin superfamily lectin receptors (Siglecs), which are involved in regulating the immune response to both infectious and non-infectious stimuli. The study found extensive and direct interactions between the two types of receptors, indicating a broad repression of TLR function by Siglecs. Additionally, the study found that the absence of Neu1, a sialidase, in hematopoietic cells protected mice against endotoxemia, suggesting that host sialidases could be therapeutic targets for lethal endotoxemia. The study also looked at the specific interaction between TLR4 and Siglec-E, finding that LPS stimulation reduced co-precipitation between the two receptors and that Neu1 translocated to the cell surface following LPS stimulation. Overall, the study highlights a previously overlooked network of interactions among Siglecs, host sialidases, and TLRs, and suggests a new framework for integrating the self-nonself and danger theories of immunity.
Morphine's ability to activate dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) has long been associated with its addictive properties. While it has been known that morphine inhibits GABA inhibitory neurons, leading to VTA-DA neuron excitation, it has not been clear whether morphine has an additional effect on excitatory input. This study found that glutamatergic input to VTA-DA neurons is inhibited by GABAergic interneurons and that morphine promotes presynaptic glutamate release by removing this inhibition. The disinhibitory action of morphine on presynaptic glutamate release was found to be the main mechanism for morphine-induced increase in VTA-DA neuron firing and related behaviors. The study used a variety of methods including the whole-cell patch-clamp method, electrophysiology, biochemistry, optogenetics, pharmacology, and behavioral approaches to explore the effect of morphine on VTA-DA neurons in rats.
Chronic muscle weakness is a common problem for sepsis survivors that is not fully understood. An appropriate animal model has been lacking to identify the mechanisms behind this long-term dysfunction. Researchers have established a new murine model of polymicrobial sepsis, which allows for the study of sepsis survivors. The study reveals that sepsis survivors have significant skeletal muscle weakness that cannot be explained by muscle atrophy, but rather is associated with impaired mitochondrial activity and persistent protein oxidative damage. The study emphasizes that improving muscle quality, rather than simply increasing muscle quantity, is essential for regaining strength and improving quality of life after sepsis.
Proper microtubule attachment is necessary for the proper segregation of sister chromatids during mitosis. The Ndc80 and Dam1 complexes are the primary microtubule binding components of the kinetochore in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The two complexes enhance each other’s binding and coupling, with Aurora B kinase serving as a regulatory hub. The C-terminal regions of Dam1p, Ask1p, and Spc34p form cross-links to three Ndc80p regions. The Ndc80 complex can simultaneously bind and bridge across two Dam1 complex rings through varying regulated interaction sites, which are important for proper spacing between the rings, and therefore vital for growth. Mutation in any one of the Ndc80p interaction regions abrogates the Ndc80 complex’s ability to bind two Dam1 rings in vitro, and results in kinetochore biorientation and microtubule attachment defects in vivo. The presence of two Dam1 rings at the kinetochore, in a specific orientation bound to the Ndc80 complex, would have implications for how attachment strength is established and modulated by tension.
The σ subunit is DNA specific RNA polymerase factor which enables the polymerase to initiate promoter-specific transcription. It has been observed that σ factors can remain associated with the polymerase even when elongating transcripts. The primary σ factor in Escherichia coli, σ70, was demonstrated to function as an elongation factor in vivo by loading directly onto the transcription elongation complex. This binding can affect transcription elongation, especially during stationary phase. The study also found that σ70 can engage -10-like elements within transcribed regions that could induce pausing. The study found that pausing of the TEC under control of a -10-like element within a transcribed region is sensitive to the intracellular concentration of σ70, which suggests that σ70 can access the TEC in trans, in vivo. The study also found that free σ70 can bind to TECs on a transcription unit controlled by an alternative σ factor, demonstrating that σ factors can control both initiation and elongation on the same transcription unit.
A new study proposes a mechanism for how neurons in the hippocampus and adjacent areas respond to location and head direction. The study suggests that the tuning, selectivity and invariance of spatial patterns arise from the same synaptic plasticity mechanism, driven by the statistics of synaptic inputs. Using mathematical analysis and simulations, the researchers show that the mechanism can explain the spatial patterns observed in rodents, including localized, periodic and invariant activity. The study suggests that differences in tuning of different cells in different areas reflect differences in the spatial tuning of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic afferents. The researchers also show that the mechanism can lead to grid-like firing patterns in the output neuron for different input scenarios like place cell-like input or sparse/dense non-localized input.
A longitudinal study was conducted to investigate brain changes associated with motor sequence learning. The study found that activation decreased more for trained than untrained sequences in premotor and parietal areas, without any evidence of learning-related activation increases. The study also found that premotor and parietal regions exhibited changes in the fine-grained, sequence-specific activation patterns early in learning, which stabilized later. No changes were observed in the primary motor cortex. The study provides evidence that human motor sequence learning occurs outside of M1, and that subtle changes in activity patterns across weeks are the most promising fMRI correlate of training-induced plasticity.
The article discusses the mechanisms by which proteins and cargo are transported within the Golgi apparatus, a central feature of the secretory pathway in eukaryotic cells. The study tests the vesicular transport model which suggests that COPI vesicles are responsible for trafficking anterograde cargoes forward. The researchers used a fused cell assay to study transport between separate Golgi populations. They found that not all cargoes are transported by the same mechanism and COPI vesicles do transport small secretory cargo and Golgi resident enzymes among stacked cisternae. The assay also revealed that inter-Golgi exchange can occur during the process of anterograde transport. The study employed precise and penetrating tools of modern cell and molecular biology and optics to investigate inter-Golgi transport, establishing that mobile carriers transport small anterograde cargo and glycosyl-transferases between stacked Golgi.
Scientists have identified 20 genes that play a significant role in vaccines' effectiveness. The genes that appear to have a significant correlation to a vaccine’s efficacy are mostly associated with membrane trafficking and antigen processing. The research identifies those genes as having a significant correlation between the transcriptional and antibody responses to a vaccine, identifying loci that influence vaccine responsiveness and immunity to influenza in humans. The study design can also help identify genes involved in complex traits. Influenza remains a significant threat globally and is responsible for an estimated number of deaths each year. Though vaccines are believed to be key prevention strategies, their effectiveness can be affected significantly by genetic factors, so understanding these genetic factors will help produce vaccines that would be much more efficient.
A study published in Nature Genetics found that susceptibility to cancer is heritable but that much of this heritability remains unexplained. The researchers explored epigenetic changes in the parental germ line that do not involve transmission of genetic variants from parent to offspring. They found that deleting the chromatin regulator Kdm6a (Utx) in the paternal germ line leads to elevated tumour incidence in genetically wild type mice, and that this effect increases following passage through two successive generations of Kdm6a male germline deletion, but is lost following passage through a wild type germ line. The study suggests that epigenetic changes in male gametes may impact cancer susceptibility in adult offspring.
The process of protein-protein interactions in numerous biological processes is essential for many research initiatives. Evolutionary sequence records provide a valuable source of information about protein interactions. This method of analysis can be used to distinguish between interacting and non-interacting protein pairs in large complexes. The data for these analyses come from bacterial, yeast, and human interactions. To access the most possible data sets to test the investigative approach and make predictions, all known interacting proteins were compiled in a published data set. Residue pairs with an 8 Å minimum atom distance between the residues are defined as true positive contacts, and the EVcomplex score gives estimated residual contact accuracies.
A recent study conducted by scientists from Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine showed that mice's brain cells developed a sequential activity pattern during learning associated with memory. The study revealed mice with higher learning scores had cells that became more synchronized with each other during learning. The synchronized cells formed into clusters that reorganized as the mouse's memory developed. The experiment focused on the role of the hippocampus and cells located in area CA1 in the formation of memories. The data showed that cells in the hipocampus fired action potentials in precisely timed sequences that represent stimuli associated with memory. The study has provided significant insight into the way memories are formed and provides a framework to further examine how we learn.
CD8+ T cells, which are involved in the immune response to malaria, have been found to contribute to the protection of mice against blood-stage malaria in a Fas ligand-dependent manner, according to a new study. As erythrocytes infected with malaria express no MHC class 1 molecules which can be recognised by CD8+ T cells, the precise contribution of these cells has remained controversial. CD8+ cells, it has been found, indirectly contribute to increased elimination of infected cells - via interaction with Fas-expressing cells, the cells induce the externalisation of phosphatidylserine, which enhanced the engulfment of the infected cells by phagocytes, thereby providing insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the protective immunity exerted by CD8+ T cells in collaboration with phagocytes. Malaria accounts for approximately 200m cases annually, with 600k deaths, and is a serious global health problem, especially in developing countries .
A new method for high-throughput screening of protein interactions, the Bio-Plex Interactome Assay (BPIA), has been developed and used to identify four previously unknown interactions in the Beat-Side network, a ligand-receptor pair important for motor axon guidance. The BPIA allows for identification of multiple interactions in a single sample and was found to be more sensitive and efficient than previous methods. The Beat and Side subfamilies each have multiple paralogs, and the newly defined interactions among them suggest that duplication events have played a role in their complex interaction network. The importance of studying protein interaction patterns among cell surface and secreted proteins (CSSPs) is emphasized due to their role in critical signaling pathways and as targets for therapeutic agents. However, due to the biochemical properties of many CSSP interactions, they are often difficult to detect using commonly employed techniques for high-throughput protein interaction screens.
The document discusses how certain species of birds are able to perform both rapid courtship displays and powered flight, despite the trade-off between muscle contraction speed and force. The study focuses on volant passerine birds, specifically golden-collared and red-capped manakins, that produce exceptionally fast wing movements during courtship. The study shows that these birds have evolved "superfast" contractile kinetics in their humeral retractor muscle, allowing them to produce rapid wing movements for courtship displays while still maintaining the force needed for powered flight. The study compares these muscles to those that generate aerodynamic force for flight and shows unmodified contractile kinetics. The study also examines other related species that do not perform rapid wing maneuvers during courtship displays and finds that their muscles have lower contractile speeds. Overall, the study shows that muscle-specific adaptations in contractile speed allow certain birds to perform rapid courtship displays and powered locomotion.
This article discusses the complex interactions between different microorganisms within a microbiome and how these interactions are poorly understood. The authors used E. coli as a model organism and introduced it into a cheese rind-based microbiome to identify the differences in its genetic requirements for growth in interactive and non-interactive contexts. The authors used Random Barcode Transposon Sequencing (RB-TnSeq) and RNASeq to investigate the underlying mechanisms of the microbial interactions in the microbiome. The analysis showed that growth within a community relies on a combination of pairwise and higher-order interactions. The study provides a framework for investigating microbial interactions regardless of the genetic tractability of members of the ecosystem. The authors identified the set of genes important for growth alone in the cheese environment, identified the set of genes important for growth in pairwise conditions with each individual community member and identified the set of genes important for growth in the presence of the complete community. Characterization of the functions or pathways associated with growth in interactive versus non-interactive conditions was used to infer the biological processes involved in interactions within the model microbiome.
The analysis of 3D electron microscopy (EM) data for connecting neural circuits is time and effort intensive with current automation algorithms having substantial error rates. Tissue preparation with chemical fixation loses extracellular space (ECS) which complicates the identification of synapses, but a protocol has been developed to preserve ECS in tissue that improves automated morphological image segmentation, reduction of mis-segmentation rates, and the detection of gap junctions. Preservation of ECS enables better diffusion of antibodies into tissue sections with minimal perturbation which facilitates connectomic analysis. The study can lead to improvements in the connectomic analysis of neural circuits.
The maintenance of a quiescent and organotypically-differentiated layer of blood vessel-lining endothelial cells (EC) is important for human health, but the molecular mechanisms are not well understood. This study used RNA sequencing and DNA methylation analysis to identify pathways and genes involved in the acquisition of vascular quiescence in mice. The data showed that the TGFβ pathway was the most concordantly downregulated signaling pathway during the transition to vascular quiescence, and DNA methylation changes were observed at intronic enhancers of genes involved in TGFβ family signaling. These findings provide a foundation for further mechanistic studies of vascular homeostasis and disease-associated activation.
The article describes the role of centrioles, which organize centrosomes and template cilia and flagella, and their relation to microcephaly, a neuro-developmental disease associated with small brain size. CPAP and STIL are proteins required for centriole assembly, and mutations in them lead to microcephaly. The article discusses the structure of the TCP domain of CPAP and its interaction with STIL, and explores how mutations in both components result in microcephaly. This research provides new insights into how the malfunction of centriole proteins can lead to human disease, and demonstrates that the CPAP-STIL interaction is a conserved key step in centriole biogenesis.
Cancer cells require excessive nutrients to proliferate, and studies have shown that obesity is a risk factor for certain types of cancer. Using Drosophila as a model, researchers found that feeding the flies a diet high in sucrose transformed activated cells into aggressive tumors in an insulin-resistant environment. Further research revealed that this transformation was due to a downregulation of the Hippo signaling pathway in activated cells, activating the Salt-inducible kinase and leading to an increase in Wingless signaling, one of the key mediators of diet-enhanced Ras/Src-tumorigenesis. The study identified the Hippo effector Yorkie as the primary source of increased Wingless expression in diet-enhanced Ras/Src-tumors. The study found that Ras/Src-activated cells were sensitive to perturbations in the Hippo signaling pathway, and even a mild perturbation in the pathway is sufficient to promote Ras/Src-activated tumor growth aggressively. The findings indicate that oncogenic cells are able to efficiently respond to nutritional signals, promoting tumor growth in nutrient-rich conditions, including obesity.
The loss of the checkpoint kinase ATM can lead to impairments in the DNA damage response, cerebellar neurodegeneration, and an increased risk of cancer. It is also associated with increased protein aggregation, the characteristics of which are not fully understood. However, a recent study has found that targeting ATM, as well as ATR or DNA topoisomerases, results in the widespread aggregation of a subfraction of the proteome. Aggregation-prone model substrates, including Huntingtin exon 1, aggregate faster under these conditions. The increased aggregation results from an overload of chaperone systems, which lowers the cell-intrinsic threshold for proteins to aggregate. The study identifies the molecular chaperone HSPB5 as a cell-specific suppressor of protein aggregation, and shows that the aggregation induced by genotoxic stress conditions is amenable to modulation by chaperone systems. The findings reveal that various genotoxic conditions trigger widespread protein aggregation in a manner that is highly reminiscent of the aggregation occurring in situations of proteotoxic stress and in proteinopathies.
A study conducted on rats has shown that stress does not impair recall of fear extinction when fear memories are formed before stress exposure. The study used simultaneous behavioral and in vivo electrophysiological analyses to show that fear expression during and after extinction in stressed rats is down to normal regulation of theta activity in the medial prefrontal cortex, not hyperactivity in the amygdala. Chronic stress was found to decouple activity between the two brain regions and disrupt their theta-frequency synchrony and directional coupling. This study differs from prior research that exposed animals to fear conditioning and extinction after exposure to stress, meaning that the timing of stress could be a critical determinant of whether extinction recall is impaired.
A study of the response of Drosophila olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) to naturalistic odor stimuli that are intermittently dispersed has found that the ORN firing rate remains invariant over a wide range of background signal intensities. The findings suggest that ORNs use front-end non-linearities and two adaptation mechanisms, which adjust gain whilst responding to intermittent odor stimuli. Two strategies are used: front-end non-linearities that are inherent in receptor binding to ligand, as well as two adaptation mechanisms that are sensitive to the mean and variance of the stimulus. These adaptive mechanisms cause ORNs to rapidly desensitize following encounters with odorant whiffs, dynamically adjusting gain while responding to intermittent odorant stimuli, as well as preserve information about the precise timing of odor encounters.
New evidence suggests that autophagy, the cellular degradation pathway, may be altered in Alzheimer's disease (AD) as autophagic vacuoles (AVs) accumulate and cluster in the dystrophic neurites of AD-affected neurons. Researchers at the University of Texas have demonstrated that defective retrograde transport contributes to autophagic stress in AD axons, with amphisomes predominantly accumulating at axonal terminals. They found that amyloid-β (Aβ) oligomers associated with AVs in amyloid plaques of AD-affected brains and interacted with dynein motors, which impaired dynein recruitment to amphisomes through competitive interruption of dynein-Snapin motor-adaptor coupling, thus immobilising them in distal axons. The study establishes a foundation for understanding dysregulation of autophagy in AD, potentially leading to future research into regulation of dynein-Snapin coupling to attenuate autophagic defects in AD brains.
Microdosing, the regular use of low doses of psychedelic drugs, has been touted as a way to enhance well-being and cognition. However, anecdotal reports may be biased by the placebo effect. To investigate whether the purported benefits of microdosing come from the drugs themselves or the placebo effect, a study was conducted using a self-blinding citizen science initiative. Participants were given online instructions on how to incorporate placebo control into their microdosing routine without clinical supervision. The study included 191 participants, making it the largest placebo-controlled trial on psychedelics to date. The study found that all psychological outcomes improved significantly from baseline to after the four-week dose period for the microdose group; however, the placebo group also improved, and no significant between-groups differences were observed. The findings suggest that anecdotal benefits of microdosing can be explained by the placebo effect.
Viral infection at the single-cell level is highly heterogeneous, yet usually studied at the population level. A combination of live-cell imaging and single-cell RNA sequencing was used to study the Herpes Simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection of primary human cells. The study found extreme variability in the level of viral gene expression among individually infected cells and showed that these cells cluster into transcriptionally distinct sub-populations. The study also found that anti-viral signaling is initiated in a rare group of abortively infected cells, while highly infected cells undergo cellular reprogramming to an embryonic-like transcriptional state. The study highlights the importance of studying viral infection at the single-cell level for a better understanding of the variability in infection outcomes.
Antigenic variation is central to the pathogenesis of malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum, and is the mechanism by which the parasite evades host immunity. In this study, the authors analysed gene transcription data from the culture-adapted HB3 strain of P. falciparum, to identify the global activation hierarchy that governs antigenic switching. They revealed a preference for short and highly diverse genes in central chromosomal locations, rather than longer and more conserved genes. The authors propose that this active gene transcription plays a key role in the generation of antigenic diversity, with implications for understanding age-dependent pathology in malaria.
This study investigated the mechanisms and genetic controls behind sperm competition by conducting a genetic screen in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to identify a gene, comp-1, which is specifically required in competitive contexts. The study found that comp-1 functions to modulate sperm migration and localization within the reproductive tract, promoting access to oocytes. The study's findings provide insight into the genetic regulation of sperm competition and suggest that sperm can gain advantage by modulating their motility and storage depending on their competitive environment. The study used a forward genetic screen in C. elegans to identify a sperm competition gene and a sperm competition assay to evaluate sperm competitiveness. The study's findings propose a model in which comp-1 functions in sperm to coordinate environmental signals that influence motility-related functions required for sperm to compete with one another.
This document reports on a new circuit for the propagation of waves of muscle contraction, using the peristaltic locomotion of Drosophila larvae as a model system, which sheds light on animal locomotion mechanisms. The circuit consists of an intersegmental chain of synaptically connected neurons, alternating between excitatory and inhibitory, and is necessary for wave propagation. The excitatory neurons are premotor and necessary only for forward locomotion, and are modulated by stretch receptors and descending inputs. The inhibitory neurons are necessary for both forward and backward locomotion, suggestive of different yet coupled central pattern generators, and its inhibition is necessary for wave propagation. This discovery facilitates experimentation in neural regulation of locomotion and is a promising outlook to studying the neural processes of Drosophila larvae.
This document discusses the process of termination of protein synthesis, where release factors RF1 and RF2 promote hydrolysis of peptidyl-tRNA. The GTPase RF3 promotes recycling of RF1 and RF2. Ribosome termination complexes that carry two factors, RF1–RF3 or RF2–RF3, fluctuate between non-rotated and rotated states. Dissociation of RF1 depends on peptide release and the presence of RF3, whereas RF2 can dissociate spontaneously. The recruitment of release factors changes the ribosome conformation in termination complexes and shows differences in the function of RF1 and RF2. The importance of GTP binding and hydrolysis by RF3 is also explained.
Recent evidence suggests that pseudogenes, previously thought to be inactive gene sequences, may have potential function. Researchers have discovered and characterized sets of mouse long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) induced by inflammatory signalling via TNFα. These lncRNAs include 54 pseudogene lncRNAs, which show exquisitely selective expression in response to specific cytokines and microbial components in a NF-κB-dependent manner. One particular pseudogene lncRNA, Lethe, is selectively induced by proinflammatory cytokines and functions in negative feedback signaling to NF-κB. Lethe level decreases with organismal age, a physiological state associated with increased NF-κB activity. These findings suggest that expression of pseudogene lncRNAs are actively regulated and constitute functional regulators of inflammatory signaling.
The study focuses on the sulfite-oxidizing enzymes (SOEs) and their interaction with specific electron acceptors, specifically the SorT from Sinorhizobium meliloti and its electron acceptor SorU. The study reports the structural and functional analyses of this interaction, which is dynamic in nature with an interaction of Kd=13.5 ± 0.8 μM. The study reveals the electrostatic nature of the interface with widespread hydrogen bonding. The SorT/SorU complex structure is adjusted for SorU conformation, and the proteins disassociate through conformational sampling. The study sheds light on the interprotein electron transfer process and how it is central to the redox conversions of cellular sulfur compounds. Sulfur-containing compounds are found in cellular life but are also toxic, and therefore detoxification is critical. In most cells, sulfite is oxidized by SOEs, and these enzymes are highly efficient catalysts. The kinetic parameters for this interaction are different from other sulfite-oxidizing enzymes, such as bacterial SorAB enzyme or chicken sulfite oxidase (CSO), and the study investigates the structural reasons for these differences. The researchers found a 'head-to-tail orientation' subunit arrangement in SorT, which has not been seen before. Nevertheless, the fold of the SorT monomers is similar to other SOEs, and it contains an active site with a square-pyramidal geometry with a molybdopterin cofactor. So far, this study provides the first time a crystal structure of a molybdenum enzyme in complex with its external electron acceptor has been solved, contributing to the understanding of interprotein electron transfer processes.
This study examines the role of protein synthesis and DNA methylation in the consolidation and maintenance of long-term memory (LTM) in Aplysia. The results show that early and late protein synthesis play distinct roles in memory consolidation, with later protein synthesis necessary for normal expression of LTM. Inhibition of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) blocks LTM consolidation and prevents subsequent induction by truncated training, while inhibition of DNMT later eliminates consolidated LTM. The study also shows that LTS can be established by truncated training following disruption by post-training PSI. Overall, the study provides insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying LTM consolidation and maintenance.
Piezo1 ion channels are critical for touch sensation in metazoans, but the physical stimulus that activates them and how their sensitivity is regulated is not fully understood. Researchers measured Piezo1 currents in different patch configurations while simultaneously measuring membrane geometry. They found that Piezo1 responds to lateral membrane tension with exquisite sensitivity, as compared to other mechanically activated channels, and that resting tension can drive channel inactivation, thereby tuning overall mechanical sensitivity of Piezo1. The results explain how Piezo1 can function efficiently as a sensor of mechanical stimulation in diverse cellular contexts.
The caudate nucleus is a brain structure that plays a role in monitoring behavioral flexibility in rapidly changing environments. This study recorded neuronal activity in the caudate nucleus of monkeys during a speed categorization task and found that individual neurons were context-specific but averaged population activity across multiple neurons provided a reliable read-out of the sensory and cognitive aspects of ongoing behavior. The caudate nucleus is necessary for contextually specific decisions in rapidly changing conditions and is critical for cognitive flexibility. Many psychiatric and neurological disorders that compromise the caudate nucleus are characterized by impairment in cognitive flexibility.
The pioneer factor hypothesis (PFH) suggests that pioneer factors (PFs) are a subset of transcription factors (TFs) that open inaccessible sites and recruit non-pioneer factors (non-PFs) to activate silent genes. An alternative hypothesis proposes that pioneer activity depends on the interaction between TFs and DNA rather than the categorical distinction between PFs and non-PFs. The study tested the PFH by expressing endodermal PF FOXA1 and non-PF HNF4A in mesoderm-derived K562 lymphoblast cells. FOXA1 and HNF4A bound and opened inaccessible sites and activated endodermal genes when expressed independently, and co-expression activated endoderm-specific gene expression without a functional distinction between the two TFs. The study concludes that pioneer activity depends on the affinity of interaction between TFs and DNA rather than a categorical distinction between PFs and non-PFs.
The role of Protocadherin20 (Pcdh20) in the specification of layer 4 (L4) neurons in the neocortex was investigated. Pcdh20 regulates the positioning of "future L4 neurons" into L4 via RhoA signaling, and knockdown of Pcdh20 caused malpositioning of neurons into L2/3 and acquisition of L2/3 characteristics. Thalamocortical axons provide a positional cue to immature L4 neurons. Pcdh20 plays an essential role in the specification of L4 neurons through regulating positioning of the cells after radial migration to beneath the MZ.
Researchers have developed a ribozyme capable of using trinucleotide triphosphates (triplets) as substrates for RNA-catalysed RNA synthesis on structured templates, resolving the issue of RNA folding blocking replication of RNAs. The ribozyme can synthesise its own catalytic subunit strands and assemble them into a new active ribozyme. The research supports the idea of RNA being able to template and catalyse its own replication, which has implications for early genetic systems. The potential for open-ended evolution is currently being explored. The ribozyme was developed using in vitro evolution and demonstrates a broad oligonucleotide ligation capacity with sequence generality for self-synthesis, as well as a capacity for true intermolecular interaction with primer-template duplexes, obviating the need for ribozyme-template tethering.
An SNP change in the FcγRIIB gene called I232T is linked to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), causing a loss of function in the suppressive immune receptor. The study reveals that the SNP induces an allosteric regulation that mechanically prevents FcγRIIB ligand recognition. The study analyses clinical data for 711 unrelated Chinese SLE patients and validates with single-cell fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay that I232T polymorphic change bends the FcγRIIB ectodomain toward cell membrane. The bending reduced the receptor's in situ two-dimensional (2D) binding kinetics of IgG1, IgG2 and IgG3 by three to four folds. The authors suggest that the allosteric regulation by the SNP could provide an intrinsic molecular mechanism for FcγRIIB-I232T functional loss in SLE patients.
The recycling of AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) in the brain is dependent on their internalization and transport to endosomes for either recycling or degradation. In this study, evidence is presented that AMPAR recycling occurs through different pathways that are regulated by synaptic activity. This finding challenges the assumption that recycling occurs through a single local pathway. TC10, a regulator of AMPAR recycling, was found to affect the surface levels of GluA1-containing AMPARs at somata and dendrites. Knockdown of TC10 expression resulted in reduced AMPAR recycling, whereas TC10DN and TC10CA mutants reduced GluA1-containing AMPAR surface levels by approximately 50%. The study found that AMPARs added to LTP-stimulated synapses may be trafficked from outside the local synaptic pool, contradicting the assumption that AMPAR recycling occurs locally.
Researchers have developed a method for converting mouse embryonic fibroblasts, as well as a number of other cells, into induced hair cells (iHCs). iHCs have similar morphology and electrophysiological properties to primary hair cells and offer an in vitro model for the study of hair cells' regeneration, maturation, function, and susceptibility to ototoxins. This breakthrough in molecular reprogramming was achieved by overexpressing four transcription factors: Six1, Atoh1, Pou4f3, and Gfi1. As hearing loss is the most common sensory deficit worldwide, iHCs have opened the door to discovering treatments for hair cell loss and may also provide a platform for restoring hearing via future gene therapy approaches.
The study investigated the effect of feature-based attention on spatial resampling in the visual cortex by measuring changes in pRFs (population receptive fields) under conditions of differential attention. Results showed that pRF changes were stronger when attending the stimulus's color compared to temporal frequency content, and that these feature-based attentional modulations can be explained by changes in the precision of the attentional gain field. The visual field coverage was non-uniform with the horizontal meridian being overrepresented.
This document discusses the threat of antimicrobial drug resistance and the importance of population genetic models in mitigating that threat. The document presents experimental evidence that drug resistance evolution follows two patterns: a single mutation with a large resistance benefit or multiple mutations, each conferring a small benefit, which combine to yield high-level resistance. The authors investigate the consequences of these two patterns for treatment failure and population diversity under various treatments using stochastic modeling. They find that resistance evolution is limited if more than two mutations are required and that the extent of this limitation depends on the combination of drug type and pharmacokinetic profile. The authors also compare two types of drugs, ABs and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), and consider three different shapes of drug PKs. They also compare aggressive elimination treatment with adaptive suppression. Finally, the document discusses the influence of the mechanistic pattern of resistance evolution itself and uses the findings to inform a PKPD model that reflects the two patterns of resistance evolution.
This study investigated the functional roles of paternally expressed imprinted genes (PEGs) during seed development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Although none of the PEG mutants resulted in abnormalities of seed development, three PEGs were identified as establishing postzygotic hybridization barriers in the endosperm. This suggests that PEGs have a major role as speciation genes in plants. The study also tested the hypothesis that PEGs are involved in the triploid block, which prevents the formation of viable triploid seeds, and found that three PEG mutants were able to rescue triploid seed abortion. However, no impact of maternal alleles of the PEGs was observed.
Researchers have shown the molecular mechanisms by which mTOR regulates pain using mice lacking the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1), which is a major mTOR downstream effector. They found that deletion of this protein led to enhanced spinal cord expression of neuroligin 1, a cell-adhesion postsynaptic protein regulating excitatory synapse function, and showed increased excitatory synaptic input into spinal neurons, and a lowered threshold for induction of synaptic potentiation. This mediates mechanical, but not thermal, pain hypersensitivity. The enhanced excitatory synaptic transmission is mediated via the synthesis of neuroligin 1. Reduction of neuroligin 1 levels normalizes excitatory synaptic transmission and partially reverses mechanical allodynia.
Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) plays an important role in regulating growth, metabolism, and cell survival in various mammalian tissues. The prolonged activation of IGF signaling is important for specific biological outcomes and distinguishes the IGF ligand from other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). While clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) is a major regulator of RTKs, the mechanism by which IGF-IR produces sustained signaling remains poorly understood. This study found that insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) delays the AP2-mediated endocytosis of IGF-IR after ligand stimulation, promoting the surface retention of activated IGF-IR through inhibiting AP2-dependent internalization of IGF-IR. This new role of IRS-1 suggests IRS-1 as an endocytic regulator of IGF-IR that ensures sustained IGF bioactivity independently of its classic role as an adaptor in IGF-IR signaling.
The eggs of the European beewolf Philanthus triangulum emit high levels of gaseous nitric oxide (NO) to protect themselves and their provisions from mold fungi. The NO is generated by a NO-synthase (NOS) involved in producing extraordinary concentrations of nitrogen radicals in brood cells, which prevent microbial infestation. The eggs emit an antifungal agent that inhibits the growth of a number of fungi, with bioassays demonstrating that the compound is NO. The generation of NO represents a novel facet in the array of functions of this important biological effector. The evolution of such pathogenic effects in response to the presence of fungi and bacteria is a common response amongst animals and plants.
A study conducted controlled exposure experiments on 42 humpback whale mother-calf pairs on a resting ground off Australia, to test the hypothesis that vessel noise level is a driver of disturbance in whales. The research vessel played back vessel noise at low, medium or high low frequency-weighted source levels (re 1 μPa RMS@1m). The study found that vessel noise is an adequate driver of behavioural disturbance in whales and that regulations to mitigate the impact of whale-watching should include noise emission standards. Short-term behavioural impacts of whale-watching include alterations of dive patterns, swim speeds, swim orientation, group cohesiveness and changes in acoustic behaviour, while long-term negative effects on health, survival and reproduction can result from repeated behavioural disruptions on individuals, which can in turn negatively influence population dynamics.
The circumventricular organs (CVOs) lack the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and are involved in body homeostasis. Wnt/β-catenin signaling is important for BBB development and maintenance in most CNS vessels. CVO endothelial cells have low Wnt-pathway activity. The subfornical organ (SFO) has both tight and leaky vessels. Dominant, EC-specific β-catenin transcription in mice resulted in the conversion of phenotypically leaky into BBB-like vessels, decreasing tracer permeability. Endothelial tightening increased neuronal activity in the SFO of water-restricted mice. The SFO is involved in the regulation of drinking behavior and water homeostasis of the organism. In adult mice and zebrafish, OVLT vessels were largely devoid of GFP reporter gene expression, suggesting that Wnt/β-catenin activation is strongly reduced or absent. CVO vessels possess BBB properties, and vessels of the caudal SFO region are mainly leaky. Dominant activation of β-catenin signaling in ECs may lead to vessel tightening of CVO vessels.
The article discusses how animal cells regulate their cholesterol level in the plasma membrane (PM) through the feedback mechanism of the Scap/SREBP system. It explains the paradox of the small amount of cholesterol in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) monitoring the concentration of cholesterol in the large PM pool. The article proposes that cholesterol moves from lysosomes to the PM and then, after saturation, to the ER. It defines three pools of PM cholesterol, including a pool that is accessible to bind 125I-PFO, a mutant form of bacterial Perfringolysin O. The study shows that when LDL-derived cholesterol leaves lysosomes, it expands PM's PFO-accessible pool and, after a short lag, also increases the ER's PFO-accessible regulatory pool. This regulatory mechanism allows cells to ensure optimal cholesterol levels in PM while avoiding cholesterol overaccumulation.
Mitochondria are critical for neuronal function and their dynamics helps maintain organelle shape, size, number, function and quality control from yeast to mammals. Mitofusin-2 is required for steroid hormone synthesis and cholesterol ester storage. Loss of Marf affects mitochondrial transport and causes a severe depletion of mitochondria in neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), contrary to Drp1 which only affects synaptic transmission. Seven lethal alleles of Marf were identified in a Drosophila forward genetics screen. Loss of Marf impairs the phototransduction cascade as well as synaptic transmission whereas loss of Drp1 mainly affects synaptic transmission of photoreceptors. Mitochondrial transport may be affected by physical interaction between mitochondria and the transport machinery. Mutations in mitochondrial GTPases have been associated with Parkinson's, Huntington's and Alzheimer's disease. The loss of Marf and Drp1 impacts mitochondrial function, but loss of Marf affects their function more severely.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) adjusts a cell's protein folding capacity in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in response to need. This is essential for protein-folding homeostasis and perturbations leading to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER can lead to disease. IRE1 is the most conserved UPR sensor in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for activating the UPR. The mechanism by which IRE1's lumenal domain senses ER stress has been the subject of debate. However, a recent study shows that human IRE1α's ER-lumenal domain binds peptides, inducing allosteric changes and oligomerization, to activate IRE1. Furthermore, impairment of oligomerization in mammalian cells abolished IRE1's activity. This supports the model that unfolded protein binding-induced oligomerization is the unifying mechanism for IRE1 activation in mammals and yeast.
The root cap in plants has a well-established role in environmental perception and regulation of root growth, but little is known about its involvement in nutrition. Through targeted cellular inactivation and genetic manipulation in Arabidopsis, researchers found that the root cap is crucial for phosphate uptake and homeostasis, with the diminutive size of root cap cells accounting for around 20% of total seedling phosphate uptake. This discovery extends current understanding of the root cap's function from environmental perception to novel roles in mineral nutrition and regulation.
Fumarase is an enzyme found in all organisms that is involved in both the tricarboxylic acid cycle in mitochondria and the DNA damage response in the cytosol/nucleus. The dual targeting of fumarase in eukaryotes evolved through different mechanisms in different species, with the presence or absence of a mitochondrial targeting sequence determining its distribution between compartments. Fum-bc is a prokaryotic fumarase found in Bacillus subtilis that is induced upon DNA damage and co-localizes with bacterial DNA, suggesting that its dual function preceded its dual targeting seen in eukaryotes. This study also suggests that protein dual targeting is maintained due to separate selective pressures and that dual-targeted proteins are more evolutionarily conserved than exclusive mitochondrial proteins. Fum-bc can substitute for both eukaryotic functions of fumarase in yeast and intracellular signaling of the B. subtilis DNA damage response is achieved via production of L-malic acid. The study concludes that fumarase's dual function in bacteria was the driving force behind its dual localization in eukaryotes.
The document discusses the discovery of a new osteogenic growth factor called Osteolectin/Clec11a, which is required to maintain adult skeletal bone mass. The study identified integrin α11 as the receptor for Osteolectin, which promotes the differentiation of skeletal stem cells into osteoblasts. The binding of Osteolectin to α11β1 promotes Wnt pathway activation, necessary for the osteogenic response to Osteolectin. The study also shows that autocrine Osteolectin production is part of what drives osteogenesis by bone marrow stromal cells, and its deletion reduced their osteogenic differentiation in osteogenic differentiation medium. Overall, Osteolectin offers a new mechanism for maintaining adult bone mass through Wnt pathway activation.
A study has found that expanding epithelial monolayers exhibit internal patterns of proliferation and migration that depend not on the current but on the initial tissue size, indicating memory effects. Specifically, the core of large tissues becomes very dense and ceases cell-cycle progression, while initially smaller tissues develop a local minimum of cell density and a tissue-spanning vortex. An active polar fluid model with feedback between cell polarization and tissue flow is proposed to explain vortex formation. The findings suggest that expanding epithelia decouple their internal and edge regions, which enables robust expansion dynamics despite the presence of size- and history-dependent patterns in the tissue interior. The study also highlights the importance of exploring collective cell migration across a wider range of contexts, scales, and constraints.
When proteins fail to fold correctly, this can lead to ER stress and cell death. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated, which initially aims for cytoprotection and restoration of ER balance, but can also lead to apoptosis if stress becomes irresolvable. Death receptor 5 (DR5) is activated through intracellular activation during ER stress, causing apoptosis, but the mechanism behind this is unknown. Misfolded proteins can directly bind to DR5 within the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment, where DR5 assembles caspase 8-activating complexes, promoting apoptosis. Thus, misfolded proteins can act as ligands to activate DR5, leading to apoptosis. This procedure may provide a necessary late protein-folding checkpoint before committing to a terminal apoptotic fate.
A recent study has found that the transcriptome of E. coli is spatially organized, and that inner-membrane protein-encoding mRNAs are enriched at the membrane. This is suspected to be due to co-translational insertion of signal peptides, which leads to restricted movement of the mRNA. Furthermore, time-resolved RNA sequencing demonstrated that degradation rates of these mRNAs are higher than those encoding other types of proteins. This selective destabilization is linked to RNA degradosomes located on the membrane. The study suggests that this organization affects the post-transcriptional dynamics of mRNAs in bacteria, and challenges the assumption that post-transcriptional regulation is solely influenced by translational factors.
The trafficking of myelin-reactive CD4+ T-cells across the brain endothelium is a crucial step in the onset and progression of multiple sclerosis. Although it is known that this process is antigen-specific, it is not clear which cells provide the antigen signal. This study provides direct evidence that, under inflammatory conditions, brain endothelial cells (BECs) can act as non-professional antigen presenting cells by processing and presenting myelin-derived antigens in MHC-II, thereby stimulating the migration of myelin-reactive T-cells through the brain endothelium. The study also shows that myelin is efficiently internalized by BECs and routed to the endo-lysosomal degradation pathway, where they can be processed into antigen-derived peptides for presentation on MHC-II.
This document describes the mapping of all cholinergic neuron types in the nervous system of the C. elegans male and hermaphrodite. Cholinergic neurons are those that use acetylcholine (ACh) as a neurotransmitter. It was found that ACh is the most broadly used neurotransmitter in the nervous system, employed by more than half of all neurons. The study also looked at the usage of ACh relative to other neurotransmitters within the context of the entire connectome and within specific network motifs embedded in the connectome. The map provides a resource to functionally dissect circuit function in the C. elegans nervous system and will serve as a high-resolution starting point for various types of behavioral and developmental analyses. Additionally, the mapping of neurotransmitter identities on a system-wide level with single-neuron resolution is essential for an understanding of nervous system development and function.
The article discusses the role of BRAFV600E and PI3’-lipid signaling in the development of lung tumors. The study used genetically engineered mouse models to investigate the mechanisms by which these pathways cooperate in the pathogenesis of human lung adenocarcinoma. It was found that co-expression of BRAFV600E and PIK3CAH1047R in AT2 pneumocytes leads to rapid cell de-differentiation without decreased expression of certain transcription factors. The findings shed light on how these pathways may cooperate in lung tumorigenesis and provide insight into human lung cancer progression. The study also describes the development of a reporter of BRAFV600E oncoprotein expression using tdTomato fluorescence.
Recent neuroimaging technology allows for the measurement of neural activity in different cortical layers, which may reveal how brain areas are activated. The study measured laminar-resolved functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) responses during a visual task that induced concurrent bottom-up and top-down modulations via orthogonal manipulations of stimulus contrast and feature-based attention. The study found that bottom-up modulations were strongest in the middle cortical layer, while top-down modulations were strongest in the superficial layers. The study suggests that laminar activity profiles can discriminate between concurrent top-down and bottom-up processing and diagnose how a brain region is activated. The study used data from ultra-high field MRI systems of 7T and above that allowed for the non-invasive measurement of fMRI responses at lamina-resolved spatial resolutions in humans. The study found that modulations from feature-based attention were more agranular compared to stimulus contrast, which were strongest in the granular layer.
Researchers have developed a new method to map and quantify mRNA splicing variations, which can critically impact gene function and disease. The approach defines and quantifies splicing in units of local splicing variations (LSVs), which capture previously defined types of alternative splicing as well as more complex transcript variations. The method enables the mapping of tissue-specific splice variation to genetic variation, phenotype, and disease, and has been used to identify hundreds of LSVs that are specific to brain subregions or altered in Alzheimer's patients. The researchers hope the approach will advance the ability to relate tissue-specific splice variation to genetic variation, phenotype, and disease.
The Crk family of proteins plays a vital role in the elongation of lens fiber cells during vertebrate lens development by regulating cell shape changes downstream of Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) signaling. While the exact mechanism by which the cytoskeletal network is regulated by FGF signaling was previously unclear, this study shows that Crk proteins are essential partners of the Frs2/Shp2/Grb2 complex that forms during FGF signaling and stimulates the actin reorganization necessary for the morphological shaping of lens cells. The loss of Crk proteins in mice disrupted lens fiber cell elongation without affecting differentiation, suggesting that lens cell morphogenesis can be uncoupled from differentiation during development. Crk proteins enhance extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation downstream of FGF signaling and modify the quantity of FGF-ERK signaling by elevating and prolonging ERK activation. Thus, Crk proteins are not only important partners of the Frs2/Shp2/Grb2 complex in mediating FGF signaling but also regulate FGF-induced ERK activation in the developing lens.
The mechanisms by which mammalian cells recognize and restrict viral DNA are not well understood. This study used herpes simplex virus to track the recruitment of host factors to viral DNA shortly after its nuclear entry. The cellular IFI16, PML, and ATRX proteins colocalized with viral DNA by 15 minutes post infection. While initial viral heterochromatin formation was found to be ATRX-independent, it was found that viral heterochromatin stability required ATRX from 4-8 hours after infection. These findings suggest a biphasic model of epigenetic regulation in which ATRX is required for viral heterochromatin stability during chromatin stress. The study used HSV with bioorthogonally-tagged genomes to quantitatively track viral entry and host restriction factor recruitment. The spatiotemporal kinetics of incoming HSV genome colocalization with host restriction factors IFI16, PML, and ATRX were quantitatively mapped; observation revealed an early peak of IFI16-vDNA colocalization that rapidly decreased after 30 mpi. Meanwhile, ATRX colocalization with HSV DNA peaked between 40-100 mpi.
Phelan-McDermid Syndrome (PMS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, absent or delayed speech, neonatal hypotonia, attention deficits and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Mutations in the synaptic gene SHANK3 have been identified as a cause of PMS, and there are currently no pharmaceutical compounds targeting core symptoms of PMS. Researchers have developed a Shank3-deficient rat model of PMS, using zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) to target exon 6 of the ankyrin repeat domain, which has a genetic alteration similar to a human SHANK3 mutation. These rats exhibited impaired long-term social recognition memory and attention, and reduced synaptic plasticity in the hippocampal-medial prefrontal cortex pathway. However, these deficits were attenuated with oxytocin treatment. The findings suggest an oxytocinergic contribution in PMS, and an individualized therapeutic approach for this syndrome.
Neutrophils release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which can trap pathogens and have pathogenic roles in various diseases. The release of NETs can occur through several signalling mechanisms, suggesting that extrusion of NETs is important in host defence. Researchers compared the induction of NETosis by several stimuli and found that PMA, Candida albicans, and Group B Streptococcus used a related pathway for NET production, while ionophores required an alternative pathway. They also found that the NETs produced by all stimuli were proteolytically active, killed bacteria, and composed mainly of chromosomal DNA. The researchers used primary neutrophils from healthy donors treated with five stimuli and inhibitors to molecules crucial to PMA-induced NETs, as well as neutrophils from patients with chronic granulomatous disease, to clarify the essential elements involved in NET induction. They visualised and quantified NETs in samples and showed that the NETs generated by the five stimuli had similar properties and that NETosis is a unique form of cell death, different from classical cell death pathways involving apoptosis and necroptosis.
Trisomy, the presence of a third copy of one chromosome, usually results in inviable or defective offspring if passed through the germ line. Caenorhabditis elegans with trisomy of the X chromosome, however, have fewer trisomic offspring than expected due to preferential elimination of the extra X chromosome during anaphase I of female meiosis. This bias is attributed to the asymmetric positioning of meiotic spindles, which allows for the preferential deposition of the extra X chromosome into a polar body during meiosis I. The authors suggest that this previously unrecognized advantage of asymmetric meiosis partially corrects pre-existing trisomy. Females deposit one genome in a single haploid egg while the other three genomes are segregated into polar bodies, which is conserved across animal phyla. The elimination of the extra chromosome from an oocyte starting with a trisomy would result in rescue to a euploid state.
Researchers have discovered that norepinephrine (NE) plays a key role in promoting arousal and wakefulness. Pharmacological studies in mammals have previously suggested this, but contradictory reports on the effects of mice lacking NE had left the role of endogenous NE unclear. The researchers generated dbh mutant zebrafish, which exhibited dramatically increased sleep, but had a reduced arousal threshold, possibly due to a lack of NE. The mutant fish were treated with small molecules that inhibit NE signalling, with similar effects. NE synthesised in the Locus Coeruleus (LC) appears to be involved in mediating the arousing effects of hypocretin (hcrt) neurons, while genetic overexpression and optogenetic activation of Hcrt neurons induced arousal in zebrafish.
The process of protein synthesis is tightly regulated to ensure proper folding and functioning of newly synthesized proteins. Defects in this process can lead to the accumulation of toxic proteins and contribute to diseases such as neurodegeneration. One mechanism of regulating protein synthesis is through the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis pathway, which involves targeting misfolded or stalled proteins for degradation by the proteasome. The process of ribosome-associated degradation (RAD) involves the segregase Cdc48/p97 and its adaptors Ufd1-Npl4, which mediate the clearance of ubiquitinated nascent peptides from ribosomes. The Cdc48/p97 pathway functions downstream of the Ub ligases Ltn1 and Ubr1 to release nascent proteins from the ribosome. This mechanism is important for maintaining protein homeostasis and preventing the accumulation of toxic proteins. Moreover, defects in the Cdc48/p97 pathway may contribute to the pathophysiology of diseases caused by mutations in p97.
Bergmann's rule, which states that individuals within a species are smaller in warmer environments, has been widely accepted as a biogeographic rule. However, a data-intensive approach has not yet been used to determine the generality of this pattern. A recent study assessed the relationship between temperature and individual mass for 952 bird and mammal species and found that Bergmann's rule is not general and temperature is not a dominant driver of biogeographic variation in mass. For 87% of species, temperature explained less than 10% of variation in mass, and for 79% of species, the correlation was not statistically significant. These results suggest that further understanding of size variation will require integrating multiple processes that influence size, and that the lack of dominant temperature forcing weakens the justification for the hypothesis that global warming could result in widespread decreases in body size. The study's data-intensive approach demonstrates the value of investing in large compilations of ecologically-relevant data, and also highlights the limitations and potential biases of previous studies examining Bergmann's rule. Additionally, the study's conclusions are limited to the intraspecific form of Bergmann's rule and the scope of the conclusions apply only to endotherms.
Researchers from New York's Rockefeller University have discovered that rapamycin, an immunosuppressant and cancer drug, has the potential to treat mitochondrial-related neurodegeneration - a key driver of Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases. The scientists found that by suppressing the protein synthesis process, a major energy-consuming process which rapidly depletes depleted ATP (adenosine triphosphate) levels in neurons that have been treated with mitochondrial inhibitors, like CCCP, rotenone and antimycin-A, neurons were preserved. The patient's rate of decline improved significantly, which could prove key for treating those with relatively unmanageable cases. 

Researchers have discovered that epigenetic modifiers, a class of anti-tumour drugs used to modify gene expression, show potential in treating autoimmune diabetes. A short treatment of mice with I-BET151, a small-molecule inhibitor of bromodomains, transcriptional regulators that impact multiple cellular processes, was found to have a significant and long-lasting impact on the onset of diabetes. The inhibitor had minimal impact on circulating T cells; instead, it prompted pancreatic macrophages to adopt an anti-inflammatory phenotype, impacting the NF-κB pathway in particular. The inhibitor also elicited regeneration of islet β-cells. As I-BET151 achieves a combination therapy, coincidentally dampening islet inflammation and enhancing β-cell regeneration, researchers believe it has potential as a therapeutic intervention in autoimmune diabetes.
A new study has found that miR-1255b, miR-148b, and miR-193b specifically suppress the homologous recombination (HR) pathway in the G1 phase, leading to impaired repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), which can increase the risk of carcinogenesis. The researchers conducted a gain-of-function screen and found that overexpression of these three miRNAs reduced HR-mediated DSB repair, while their inhibition led to increased expression of BRCA1, BRCA2, and RAD51, which are critical proteins for DSB repair in G1 cells. Deletion of these miRNAs in tumour samples showed a significant increase in loss-of-heterozygosity events and chromosomal aberrations. The researchers suggest that the identification of factors like these miRNAs can enhance the clinical utility of PARP inhibitors and improve cancer therapy.
This document discusses research on the role of O-glycosylation in breast carcinomas. The study found that ER O-glycosylation, which is constitutively activated in over 60% of breast carcinomas, promotes cell migration and is induced through the relocation of GalNAc-Transferases (GalNAc-Ts) from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The study identified 12 negative regulators of O-glycosylation, including ERK8, and found that ERK8 is a strong hit that inhibits COPI vesicle formation and the export of GalNAc-Ts from the ER to the Golgi. Additionally, the research found that ERK8 expression is reduced in breast and lung carcinomas where Tn levels are high, and loss of ERK8 expression could drive cancer aggressivity through increased cell motility. Overall, the study revealed several negative regulators of the O-GalNAc glycosylation process, which appears to be tightly controlled by signalling mechanisms.
This study investigates the relationship between grid cells and place cells in the brain's spatial navigation system. The authors propose a single-layer neural network with feedforward weights connecting place-like input cells to grid cell outputs to investigate the effect of the nature of the input from place cells on grid cells. They find that if the components of the feedforward neural network are non-negative, the output converges to a hexagonal lattice similar to real grid cells. The study demonstrates a possible linkage between the interaction of place cell to grid cell and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) mechanisms. The authors conclude that the non-negativity constraint imposed on the projection of input from place cells onto grid cells is critical in the formation of hexagonal grid-like responses.
The presynaptic adhesion G-protein-coupled receptor, latrophilin-1, and a postsynaptic transmembrane protein, Lasso/teneurin-2, are involved in trans-synaptic interactions that contribute to synapse formation. During neuronal development, a substantial amount of Lasso is released into the intercellular space by regulated proteolysis, potentially precluding its function in synaptogenesis. However, released Lasso can bind to cell-surface latrophilin-1 on axonal growth cones, inducing axonal attraction. Latrophilin-1 activation by soluble Lasso causes an increase in cytosolic calcium and enhanced exocytosis, mediating growth cone steering. This receptor pair illustrates a novel mechanism of axonal pathfinding, where receptors engage in both short-range interactions and long-range signaling, contributing to the formation of complex neuronal networks.
A new study has revealed that the protein POC16 and its human homolog WDR90 are components of the microtubule wall along the central core region of the centriole. Using ultrastructure expansion microscopy for nanoscale protein mapping, researchers found that WDR90 is an evolutionary microtubule associated protein, while POC16 has been proposed to be at the inner junction between A and B microtubules. WDR90 depletion impairs the localization of inner scaffold components, leading to centriole structural abnormalities in human cells. This work highlights that WDR90 is an evolutionary conserved molecular player participating in centriole architecture integrity.
The document discusses the role of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) in postmitotic Purkinje cells (PCs) in Mus musculus during terminal differentiation. The study reveals new relationships between PC transcriptional and epigenetic programs and identifies a class of genes that lose both 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5hmC during terminal differentiation. Deletion of the 5hmC writers Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3 from postmitotic PCs prevents loss of 5mC and 5hmC in regulatory domains and gene bodies, hindering transcriptional and epigenetic developmental transitions. The study finds that Tet-mediated active DNA demethylation occurs in vivo and that acquisition of the precise molecular properties of adult PCs require continued oxidation of 5mC to 5hmC during the final phases of differentiation.
The RNA-binding proteins NOVA1 and NOVA2 regulate alternative splicing events in at least 700 genes in vivo. While little is known about their specific biologic consequences and functional differences, a recent study found that NOVA2 uniquely regulates alternative splicing events in axon guidance-related genes during cortical development. Nova2-/- mice had specific axonal pathfinding defects, including agenesis of the corpus callosum and axonal outgrowth defects. NOVA1 and NOVA2 are necessary for postnatal survival, and the absence of NOVA2 increases NOVA1 protein levels by 40%. The transcriptome-wide library of NOVA1-RNA and NOVA2-RNA interactions have been generated and aligned to the mouse genome, and their sequence features have been identified.
The deletion of the MEF2C gene in cortical and hippocampal excitatory neurons in mice leads to a reduction in cortical network activity due to increased inhibitory and decreased excitatory synaptic transmission. MEF2C regulates the density of excitatory/inhibitory synapses predominantly through cell-autonomous, transcriptional repression. The study suggests that disrupting MEF2C function in the neocortex can produce behaviors reminiscent of autism and intellectual disability in mice. The findings highlight the role of MEF2C in normal brain development and function and shed light on the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders.
Bre1 and its partner Lge1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are responsible for histone H2B monoubiquitination, which plays a role in regulating transcription, DNA replication, and DNA damage response and repair. The deletion of BRE1 or LGE1 results in whole chromosome instability. Recent research has discovered a novel role for Bre1, Lge1, and H2Bub1 in chromosome segregation and sister chromatid cohesion. Bre1’s function in G1 and S phases contributes to cohesion establishment, but it is not required for cohesion maintenance in G2 phase. Bre1 is dispensable for the loading of cohesin complex to chromatin in G1, but regulates the localization of replication factor Mcm10 and cohesion establishment factors Ctf4, Ctf18, and Eco1 to early replication origins in G1 and S phases, and promotes cohesin subunit Smc3 acetylation for cohesion stabilization. Deletion of BRE1 or LGE1 also results in significant chromosome fragment loss rates, suggesting a role for Bre1–Lge1 in accurate chromosome segregation.
Scientists have identified a protein called Nerfin-1 which can inhibit the activity of the Sd-Yki complex, acting as a transcriptional repressor to regulate the transcriptional output of Hippo signaling, which regulates organ size, tissue regeneration, and stem cell biology. The protein also plays a conserved role in repressing the activity of the TEAD-YAP complex, suggesting it could be used to modulate the YAP oncoprotein in cancer and regenerative medicine. Loss of Nerfin-1 also enhances the ability of winner cells to eliminate loser cells in multiple scenarios of cell competition, contributing to tissue undergrowth. The findings imply new therapeutic approaches to cancer and regenerative medicine.
The document describes a study on the seroepidemiology of eight enteropathogens in children in low-resource settings in Haiti, Kenya, and Tanzania. The study used multiplex bead assays to measure IgG responses to the pathogens and evaluated serological methods to compare between-pathogen heterogeneity in infection, including estimates of force of infection. The analysis found that exposure to most pathogens was intense, with the primary infection window <3 years old, and for some pathogens, primary infection occurred within the first year. Longitudinal profiles demonstrated significant IgG boosting and waning above seropositivity cutoffs, highlighting the value of longitudinal designs to estimate force of infection. The findings suggest that antibody response can be used to measure population-level transmission of diverse enteropathogens in serologic surveillance. The study also highlighted the challenges of interpreting IgG measures due to variability in antibody responses and multiple previous infections with different pathogens.
Researchers have developed a mathematical modelling-based framework to select immune-inducing microbial communities from microbiome composition for investigating diseases. The technique involves combining mathematical modelling and microbiome ecology models to predict the immune-stimulating bacteria groups that would maximise the desired immune response. The researchers believe that the technique could have relevance for a range of immune-enhancing applications, including the selection of probiotic-based cancer immunotherapies.
Dynein is a molecular motor protein that plays critical roles in the developing and mature nervous system, including nuclear migration and transport of various cargoes. Mutations in dynein are causative of numerous developmental neuropathies and motor neuron diseases called 'dyneinopathies.' To circumvent complications associated with dynein studies in human cells, budding yeast was employed as a screening platform to characterize the motility properties of seventeen disease-correlated dynein mutants. By engineering compensatory mutations, the mutant phenotypes in two cases were alleviated. These results provide molecular insight into dynein regulation and suggest that disease state may be dictated by the degree of dynein dysfunction. The study also reveals that mutations in dynein can lead to mislocalization of cellular cargoes, especially in motor neurons, which is a common pathological hallmark for motor neuron disease.
The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway degrades mRNAs containing long 3'UTRs to regulate both mRNA quality control and gene expression. The poly-pyrimidine tract binding protein 1 (PTBP1) has been shown to shield specific retroviral and cellular transcripts from NMD by marking specific stop codons as genuine, thus preserving the ability of NMD to detect aberrant mRNAs and the capacity of long 3'UTRs to regulate gene expression. This mechanism protects specific mRNAs from NMD, and RNA-seq analysis showed that PTBP1 enrichment near stop codons correlates with 3'UTR length and resistance to NMD. Retroviruses provide models to explore the functions of host mRNA processing, translation, and decay pathways. Vertebrates 3'UTR functions have required a physical expansion of 3'UTR lengths, complicating the process of detecting nonsense mutations. The RSE sequence, found in Rous sarcoma virus, is a necessary requirement for NMD resistance. PTBP1 functions to exclude UPF1 from 3'UTRs, disrupting its ability to accurately discriminate 3'UTR length and induce decay. Thus, mechanisms to protect specific mRNAs from NMD are likely to be a major force shaping human gene expression.
Mice deficient in the heme transporter SLC48A1 accumulate over ten times the normal amount of heme in enlarged lysosomes and produce hemozoin, a previously undiscovered heme tolerance pathway in mammals. Mice lacking SLC48A1 have impaired erythroid maturation and can't systemically respond to iron deficiency. However, when haplo insufficiency of the heme degrading enzyme HMOX1 is combined with SLC48A1 inactivation, it results in perinatal lethality, demonstrating synthetic lethal interactions between heme transport and degradation. Additionally, because the transporter is mainly expressed in RES macrophages, there is a reduction of mature red pulp macrophages in KO spleens, with heme-iron stores that remain bio-unavailable. Iron-deficient KO mice also have a reduced response to iron deficiency, particularly in the spleen, where heme-iron accumulates at high levels.
Researchers have identified the gene regulatory system that determines how a single neuron induces sleep in the Caenorhabditis elegans worm. Scientists found that the LIM-6 transcription factor specifies the expression of APTF-1, which controls the sleep-inducing activity of RIS neuron via the FLP-11 neuropeptide. The LIM-6 factor is homologous to the human TFAP2beta, which is linked to insomnia or sleepwalking. The researchers suggest that RIS-dependent sleep-induction through FLP-11 release shares evolutionary roots with sleep-promoting neurons in mammals that express GABA. Understanding the genetic regulation of sleep-induction could lead to the development of new drugs to treat sleep-related disorders.
Thrombospondin-4 (Thbs4) has been identified as a key regulator of skeletal muscle's susceptibility to muscular dystrophy (MD) by its role in the organisation of membrane attachment complexes. Loss of the Thbs4 gene can cause spontaneous dystrophic changes with ageing and accelerate the disease in two mouse models of MD, while overexpression is protective and can mitigate dystrophic disease. Thbs4 directs an intracellular vesicular trafficking network that promotes greater stability of the dystrophin-glycoprotein and integrin complexes at the sarcolemma of skeletal muscle fibres to stabilise the sarcolemma. This function of Thbs is conserved in Drosophila. Thbs4 has been identified as a potential therapeutic target for MD.
Researchers have identified potential allosteric sites in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) through combining X-ray crystallography experiments and small-molecule fragment soaks. The study also highlights a new approach for characterizing conformational heterogeneity to enable long-range control of protein function. The research may aid future development of potent non-covalent small-molecule allosteric inhibitors for PTP1B and other biologically important phospho-signaling proteins.
Mycobacteria, a genus of rod-shaped bacteria including the major human pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis, differs from other model bacteria like Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis in how peptidoglycan (PG) is constructed. While new PG is inserted at the cell poles, rather than along the lateral walls, new research has found that crosslinks are required for rod shape maintenance exclusively at aging cell walls, a byproduct of polar elongation. In mycobacteria, crosslinks formed by L, D-transpeptidases (LDTs) are highly abundant, accounting for at least 60% of linkages. When LDT-mediated crosslinks are absent, PBPs become more important, which could be exploited to more effectively treat Mtb with a combination of drugs capable of PBP- and LDT-inhibition. Tuberculosis remains an enormous global health problem and drugs that target PG are not part of the core treatment for either drug-susceptible or drug-resistant disease.
Genetic studies often only focus on the nuclear genome and neglect the organelle genome, despite its central role in controlling metabolism and function. A recent study conducted a metabolomic QTL analysis on Arabidopsis to understand how variation in the organelle genome affects phenotypic variation, and found that cytoplasmic variation had effects on metabolome variation similar to, if not larger than, individual nuclear loci. The cytoplasmic genetic variation was a central hub in the epistatic network controlling plant metabolism, and could alter or hide pairwise epistasis between nuclear loci. Thus, cytoplasmic genetic variation plays a central role in controlling natural variation in metabolomic networks and must be included in future analyses of natural variation.
The laborious process of proofreading or reconciling multiple independent reconstructions when mapping neuronal circuits using electron microscopy has been addressed with new methods that apply quantitative arbor and network context to iteratively proofread and reconstruct circuits, and create anatomically enriched wiring diagrams. The researchers measured the morphological underpinnings of connectivity in new and existing reconstructions of Drosophila sensorimotor (larva) and visual (adult) systems. Synaptic inputs were preferentially located on numerous small, microtubule-free 'twigs' which branch off a single microtubule-containing 'backbone'. Omission of individual twigs accounted for 96% of errors. However, the synapses of highly connected neurons were distributed across multiple twigs. Thus, the robustness of a strong connection to detailed twig anatomy was associated with robustness to reconstruction error.
The article discusses the role of the AS regulator ESRP1 in intestinal homeostasis and pathogenesis. Reduced ESRP1 function leads to impaired intestinal barrier integrity, increased susceptibility to colitis, and altered colorectal cancer development in mice. In humans, ESRP1 is downregulated in inflamed biopsies from inflammatory bowel disease patients and loss of ESRP1 is an adverse prognostic factor in colorectal cancer. ESRP1-dependent GPR137 isoforms are altered in colorectal cancer, and expression of a specific GPR137 isoform predicts colorectal cancer patient survival. In vitro and in vivo experiments reveal that reduced Esrp1-dependent mRNA splicing results in decreased integrity of the colonic epithelial barrier and intestinal penetration of bacterial products. These epithelial defects are, however, not enough to induce intestinal immunopathology in naïve animals. Triaka animals treated with dextran sodium sulfate, a disease model of intestinal inflammation and damage, showed increased weight loss, pronounced shortening of the colon, and susceptibility to chronic DSS-induced colitis. In azoxymethane and DSS-treated Triaka mice, colorectal tumors were reduced in number and size compared with WT controls. Esrp1Triaka impairs the proliferative or regenerative capacity of cIECs during intestinal pathology.
The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) has been described as signaling outcome expectancies or value. Evidence for value comes from studies showing that OFC neurons correlate with value across features. This research aimed to determine whether OFC neurons would respond to a predictive cue signaling a "valueless" change in outcome flavor. Neurons of rats that were recorded while the rats learned about cues were found to be responsive to both predictive cues. This indicated that OFC neurons fire to cues with no value that is independent of what can be inferred through features of the predicted outcome. The study sought to address whether the OFC signals features of impending outcomes versus value, independent of those features. The research found that OFC neurons respond to the target cue just as they do to a cue that has been explicitly unblocked by increasing the amount of the outcome delivered.
A new form of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor C (VEGF-C) has been discovered in the human reproductive system by cleavage through kallikrein-related peptidase 3 (KLK3). This VEGF-C is distinct from other forms as it is produced through cleavage at a novel N-terminal site specific to KLK3. Seminal plasma displays the presence of VEGF-C, which is activated at the same time as sperm liquefaction, and its cleavage is enhanced by protein collagen and calcium binding EGF domains 1 (CCBE1). The newly discovered VEGF-C also binds to VEGFR-3, while most other mature forms of VEGF-C bind to VEGFR-2 only. Cathepsin D is identified as a protease that can activate VEGF-C and VEGF-D in addition to plasmin and ADAMTS3.
Researchers have successfully isolated a low-abundance protein complex from the stereocilia membrane fractions of inner ear sensory cells, using mass spectrometry to identify and quantify proteins. The study has provided new insights into the links between deafness and genes such as Myo7a (myosin VIIA), which affects the development and function of mechanosensory hair cells. Researchers discovered that Myo7a interacts with PDZD7, a paralog of USH1C and DFNB31, and these proteins form part of the ankle-link region of stereocilia. By developing a high-throughput method for stereocilia membrane enrichment using a specific monoclonal antibody, the researchers have also indicated that the coupled stereocilia-membrane purification and immunoaffinity isolation methods could be useful for isolating even very rare protein complexes.
The way stimuli applied to the skin are transmitted to the central nervous system is under intense study. Recent findings suggest that light stimulation of the epidermis can elicit action potentials in multiple types of cutaneous sensory neurons, indicating a significantly expanded role for the epidermis in sensory processing. The skin produces neuroactive substances that can directly and indirectly modulate the activity of sensory fibers, and the skin also expresses ligand-gated and voltage-gated ion channels and growth factor and cytokine receptors, indicating that autocrine and paracrine signaling between epithelial and neural tissues underlie sensory signaling. Using a combination of optogenetics and electrophysiology, the researchers found that light stimulation of skin keratinocytes was sufficient to generate nocifensive behaviors and regulate firing properties and evoke action potentials in specific subsets of cutaneous afferents, several of which are known to activate in response to painful stimuli. Specifically, in mice expressing ChR2 in keratinocytes, blue light activation of the skin could evoke action potentials in multiple types of cutaneous sensory neurons. The authors suggest that robust communication occurs between keratinocytes and sensory afferents that transmit nociceptive stimuli.
Select strains from the gut bacteria phylum Bacteroidetes have been found to display selective bile salt hydrolase (BSH) activity. Testing the activity of 20 Bacteroidetes strains, as well as two Gram-positive species for comparison, researchers demonstrate that many Bacteroidetes strains exhibit selectivity for conjugated tauro- over glyco-bile acid substrates. A subset of these strains exhibited selectivity exclusively based on the steroidal core structure. The study represents the first systematic evaluation of BSH activity in the common gut-bacterial phylum Bacteroidetes. The deletion of a single gene in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron exerted significant effects on host metabolism in a gnotobiotic environment which demonstrates that metabolites generated by a single microbial gene and enzymatic activity can alter host metabolism and gene expression at local and organism-level scales.
The article discusses the effectiveness of a dengue early warning system developed in Brazil before the 2014 World Cup. The system provided probabilistic forecasts of dengue risk, and the study evaluates the ability of the system to predict high dengue risk based on June 2014 data. The forecast model produced more hits and fewer missed events than the null model, making the system useful to public health services ahead of mass gatherings and peak dengue seasons. The article discusses the challenges and limitations of producing disease risk forecasts, such as lack of data, limited spatial resolution, and difficulties in communication. The probabilistic forecasts were generated for all 553 microregions of Brazil, giving an overview of nationwide dengue risk.
Integrins are cell surface receptors essential for cell function and signaling. The adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA) of Bordetella pertussis, the agent that causes whooping cough, preferentially binds to the inactive form of the integrin complement receptor 3 (CR3), using a site outside of its I-domain. CyaA binding does not trigger downstream signaling of CR3 and effectively blocks signaling initiated by a natural ligand. This unique type of integrin-ligand interaction distinguishes CyaA from other known ligands of integrins and provides further insight into its role in the pathogenesis of B. pertussis.
A study evaluated the performance of metabolic gestational age estimation models developed in Ontario, Canada, in newborns born in Bangladesh. The algorithms accurately estimated gestational age to within an average deviation of one week overall from both cord and heel prick blood samples. The study concluded that metabolic gestational age estimation provides accurate population-level estimates of gestational age in low-resource settings. The results offer hope for the implementation of metabolic gestational age dating in low-resource settings to determine the burden of preterm birth and intrauterine growth restriction. The study also noted opportunities and challenges for metabolic gestational dating approaches, such as the need to optimize algorithms for use on cord blood data and the lack of standard newborn screening in low- and middle-income countries.
The study investigates the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying decision-making during olfactory navigation in Caenorhabditis elegans. The researchers find that the animals choose the correct migratory direction based on subtle changes in odor concentrations through a form of behavioral decision-making. The timing of neuronal responses is determined by cell type-dependent involvement of calcium channels, which may serve as a cellular basis for decision-making. The study also reveals that C. elegans can efficiently choose the appropriate migratory direction on a repulsive odor gradient. The researchers developed a method for measuring and determining the dynamic spatio-temporal pattern of the naturally evaporating and diffusing odor gradient. They found that the temporal changes in odor concentration were strongly correlated with the two behavioral states of the animals - pirouettes and runs - which are associated with positive and negative dCworm/dt, respectively. The study suggests that the efficient transitions between discrete behavioral states based on odor concentration information may lead to the appropriate choice of migratory direction as a simple form of decision-making.
The study looks at the connection between different neuromodulators in the brain and global brain states, particularly during sleep. Using biophysically realistic models, the study examines the actions of acetylcholine, GABA, and monoamines, and the intrinsic and synaptic mechanisms that lead to transitions between primary brain vigilance states (waking, non-rapid eye movement sleep [NREM] and REM sleep) within an ultradian cycle. The study finds that during NREM sleep, the power of spindle and delta oscillations is negatively correlated in humans and positively correlated in animal recordings, and the difference is attributed to the levels of ACh. The study identifies the critical intrinsic and synaptic mechanisms through which different neuromodulators acting in combination result in characteristic brain EEG rhythms and transitions between sleep stages, and presents a comprehensive computational model of the thalamocortical system implementing effects of neuromodulators. The study predicts that even minor changes of neuromodulators may affect memory consolidation through their impact on sleep spindles and sleep slow oscillation in NREM sleep.
Researchers have identified a natural product called kasugamycin which can decrease mistranslation in bacteria and increase their susceptibility to antibiotics. Bacteria use an indirect pathway to generate aminoacylated glutamine and/or asparagine tRNAs, but mutations in this pathway lead to mistranslation and increased resistance to antibiotics, a common issue with tuberculosis treatment. Kasugamycin can reduce mistranslation while another aminoglycoside, streptomycin, cannot. Kasugamycin specifically lowers mistranslation rates caused by indirect tRNA-mediated translation. The researchers suggest that reducing mistranslation may be a successful way to increase the effectiveness of antibiotics. The study was carried out on mice, and although it successfully reduced mistranslation in vivo, kasugamycin and rifampicin administered together was poorly tolerated.
EGFR-mutant lung cancer is increasingly treated with erlotinib but often followed by drug resistance. Researchers have identified the stem cell transcriptional regulator SOX2 as a key mechanism for resistance. SOX2 suppresses the expression of pro-apoptotic molecules that mediate death following oncogene withdrawal in cancer cells. The induction of SOX2 results from the activation of FOXO6, a forkhead family transcription factor, following EGFR inhibition. Knockdown or ectopic expression of SOX2 modulates the degree of apoptosis observed following oncogene withdrawal and promotes drug resistance.
The Na+/K+-pump is a primary active membrane transporter in animal cells that maintains the physiological K+ and Na+ electrochemical gradients across the cell membrane. It works via an 'alternating-access' mechanism, making iterative transitions between inward-facing and outward-facing conformations. The ion specificity of the binding sites and the detailed physicochemical factors governing their selectivity remain unknown. In this study, molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to examine the structural stability of the binding pocket for different protonation configurations. The results suggest that the protonation state and the selectivity of the pump are tightly coupled, with a specific set of binding pocket residues being protonated in E1 and a different set in E2, thus reinforcing the overall transport selectivity and protecting the stoichiometry of the pump cycle.
Researchers have discovered that the bacterial enzyme Dadh, which is found in the human gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta, can dehydroxylate catecholamine neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, which may be beneficial for bacterial growth. The researchers also identified other enzymes that metabolize other plant- and host-derived catechols. Although the molecular basis for catechol dehydroxylation and its distribution among gut microorganisms are poorly understood, the findings suggest that catecholamine neurotransmitters can be used as electron acceptors by certain bacteria. This discovery could provide insights into the biological roles of gut microbial metabolism and highlight strategies for manipulating and studying microbial functions.
Researchers have found that cells use different pathways to respond to changes in their environment depending on whether the stress is sudden or increasing and fluctuating. By studying yeast cells in response to hyperosmotic stress, the researchers discovered that assigning opposing tasks to different signalling subnetworks helped mitigate trade-offs in performance. The researchers found that fast response times were less accurate, and that higher amplifications could cause overshooting and unintended oscillations. Yeast cells responded to hyperosmotic stress by using two input pathways to activate the p38 kinase, Hog1, which sent signals to the cells to synthesise the osmoprotectant glycerol. The researchers concluded that the Y-shaped structure used by the cells allowed them to respond quickly and accurately, maintaining both speed and accuracy despite changes in the environment.
Researchers have identified a naturally occurring midgut-to-renal lineage conversion event during Drosophila metamorphosis and have identified Cut as a master switch in the process. The process involves the Wnt/Wingless morphogen gradient and a pulse of the steroid hormone ecdysone to induce cut expression in a subset of midgut progenitors and reprogram them into renal progenitors. The study has uncovered a poising-and-bridging mechanism that orchestrates natural lineage reprogramming with temporal and spatial precision, providing insight into in vivo lineage conversion with the potential to inform regenerative medicine.
The cytokine TNF regulates many biological processes including inflammation and cell death and is heavily implicated in inflammatory diseases. TNF secretion is catalyzed by the protease TACE (also called ADAM17) which requires trafficking membrane proteins called iRhoms. The study identifies a novel protein, iTAP (iRhom Tail-Associated Protein) that binds to iRhoms, enhancing their cell surface stability and prevents their degradation in lysosomes. Depleting iTAP impairs TNF production and tissues from iTAP KO mice exhibit a pronounced depletion in active TACE levels. iTAP is identified as a key physiological regulator of TNF release and a novel target for the control of inflammation.
The BRCA1 gene plays an important role in repairing DNA double strand breaks and mutations in the gene are associated with a high risk of developing breast and ovarian cancer. A study has investigated the functionality of 22 patient-derived
This study used immersive virtual reality and EEG recordings to investigate the link between emotional arousal and parieto-occipital alpha power. 37 young healthy adults completed a rollercoaster VR experience while their EEG was recorded and continuously rated their subjective emotional arousal while viewing a replay of their experience. Two spatial filtering methods and a long short-term memory recurrent neural network were used to link alpha power and subjective emotional arousal. The study found a negative association between parieto-occipital alpha power and subjective emotional arousal under dynamic and interactive stimulation. The results suggest that combining immersive VR and EEG can be used for real-world neuroscience research.
The timing and accuracy of decision-making are sensitive to fluctuations in arousal, but the impact of arousal on different stages of the decision-making process is not well understood. This study used electroencephalography (EEG) to examine the impact of both tonic (baseline) and phasic (task-evoked) arousal, as measured by changes in pupil diameter, on different processing stages of decision-making. The study found that both measures of arousal were predictive of specific EEG signatures related to attentional engagement, target selection, decision processing and motor preparation. The relationship between arousal and behavioral performance was best described by non-monotonic polynomial models. The study also found that variability in decision processing was a good predictor of variability in task performance due to tonic arousal, while pre-target alpha-band activity and consistency in decision processing were good predictors of variability due to phasic arousal.
Researchers have identified a new type of rosetting in malaria. Rosetting is where infected erythrocytes attach to uninfected erythrocytes and has been associated with malaria pathogenesis. The new type of rosetting was found to be mediated by insulin growth factor binding protein 7 (IGFBP7), a protein secreted by monocytes in response to parasite stimulation. This type II rosetting requires two additional serum factors, von Willebrand factor and thrombospondin-1, to mediate rosette formation. IGFBP7-mediated rosetting reduces phagocytosis of infected erythrocytes by host phagocytes, providing an escape mechanism for the malaria parasites. The study also found that PfEMP1 is essential for IGFBP7-mediated rosetting in Plasmodium falciparum. The new discovery could provide a target for future drug development to combat malaria.
The retinal axon projections in zebrafish larvae form a map of the visual environment in the tectum. Different tectal neurons respond to specific features of visual stimuli, such as prey at a distance or looming threats, and their responses are influenced by the local statistics of the sensory environment. Using two-photon calcium imaging, researchers found that tectal cells respond to small, large, or looming dots, sometimes in combination, and are largely non-overlapping with cells that respond to global brightening or dimming. The cellular architecture of the tectum is adapted to the expected features of a prey object as it moves across the visual field during a hunting pursuit. Retinal inputs largely determine the feature selectivity of tectal neurons, although other factors also contribute.
The article discusses the importance of respiration in providing energy for eukaryote cells, and specifically focuses on the mitochondrial electron transport chain (mETC) and complex I (CI), which is responsible for pumping hydrogen ions and producing energy. The authors present a cryoEM structure of the known CI assembly intermediate CI* from Vigna radiata at 3.9 Å resolution, which reveals significant differences between the subunits of the plant complex compared to those of yeast, mammals, and bacteria. The article explores the role of plant mETC in energy conversion, balancing cellular redox state, and the procurement of biosynthetic precursors, and highlights the challenges in studying plant mitochondrial complexes due to limitations in protein sample availability. The authors also discuss the implications of their findings for the possibility of CI* providing additional flexibility to plants' mETC.
The proteins Sas-6 and Ana2/STIL are necessary for the duplication of centrioles, which are crucial for the formation of cilia/flagella and centrosomes that play important roles in cell functions. A new study has shown that the Drosophila Ana2 CCCD forms a tetramer which adopts an unusual parallel-coil topology. The study also revealed that the Drosophila Sas-6 N-terminal domain forms higher-order oligomers through canonical interactions. Mutations that impact the homo-oligomerisation of either Sas-6 or Ana2 significantly perturb centriole assembly. These proteins cooperate in the formation of the cartwheel structure that initiates centriole assembly. Understanding the formation and function of centrioles is becoming increasingly important in basic and biomedical research as their dysfunction is associated with a range of human pathologies.
The research identified and characterized 770 plastid-targeted proteins that are conserved across the ochrophytes, a major group of algae including diatoms, pelagophytes, and kelps, that possess plastids derived from red algae. The study shows that the ancestral ochrophyte plastid proteome was an evolutionary chimera, with 25% of its nucleus-encoded proteins deriving from green algae. The study additionally shows that functional mixing of host and plastid proteomes, such as through dual-targeting, is an ancestral feature of plastid evolution. Finally, the study detects a clear phylogenetic signal from one ochrophyte subgroup, the lineage containing pelagophytes and dictyochophytes, in plastid-targeted proteins from another major algal lineage, the haptophytes, which may represent a possible serial endosymbiosis event deep in eukaryotic evolutionary history.
The study found that the Na+/Ca2+, K+ exchanger NCKX4 is essential for cone-mediated vision and essential for the normal development, function, and survival of cones, particularly in regulating Ca2+ dynamics. The researchers found that NCKX4, which is expressed in zebrafish, mouse, and primate cones, shapes the cone photoresponse together with the cone-specific NCKX2. While NCKX4 acts early to limit response amplitude, NCKX2 acts late to further accelerate response recovery. The study also found that NCKX4 is expressed in cones and rod bipolar cells and may potentially regulate retinal synaptic transmission and signal processing. Experiments showed that the absence of NCKX4 delayed the response termination of dim flash response in rodless cones.
The document describes a new live cell imaging setup that has been established to observe male meiocytes in the model plant Arabidopsis. The setup is based on the visualization of microtubules and a meiotic cohesin subunit that allows following five cellular parameters. The study finds that the states of these parameters are not randomly associated and identify 11 cellular states referred to as landmarks. The study revisits a previously identified mutant in the meiotic A-type cyclin TARDY ASYNCHRONOUS MEIOSIS (TAM). The imaging system reveals altered landmarks in TAM. The study provides insights into the robustness of meiocyte differentiation steps and provides important criteria to judge and/or re-evaluate mutants affecting meiosis. The authors have generated a GFP fusion to REC8, the alpha kleisin subunit of the cohesin complex, which is highly specific for meiocytes in all species analyzed so far. The authors also combined the PROREC8:REC8:GFP with PRORPS5A:TagRFP:TUB4 or PRORPS5A:TagRFP:TUA5 that label MTs and hence permit observation of the cell shape and the formation of the spindles.
The impact of reward and punishment outcomes on instrumental learning can contribute to motivational biases in behaviour, on top of Pavlovian response biases. The study used a novel paradigm to disentangle the impact of reward and punishment on instrumental learning from Pavlovian response biasing. It found that motivational biases reflect both Pavlovian and instrumental effects, and that these biases were altered independently by the catecholamine enhancer melthylphenidate. The study helps refine current models of catecholaminergic modulation of motivated action and could provide insight into neuropsychiatric disorders such as ADHD, Parkinson's disease, and addiction.
Ceapins, a class of pyrazole amides, have been discovered and developed to block the membrane-bound transcription factor ATF6α signalling in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, a process required for cells to survive. Ceapins sensitise cells to ER stress without impacting viability of unstressed cells and are highly specific inhibitors of ATF6α signalling, not affecting signalling through the other branches of the unfolded protein response (UPR). These are the first inhibitors to be developed to modulate all three UPR branches, enabling exploration of the role of ATF6α in pathological settings. Through structure-activity studies, the potency of the Ceapin class of selective ATF6α inhibitors was increased ten-fold.
The most common non-coding mutations in cancer are in the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter, but their role in tumorigenesis is not clear. Researchers used genome editing on human pluripotent stem cells to investigate this mechanism, finding that TERT promoter mutations can promote immortalization and tumorigenesis of incipient cancer cells. Activation of telomerase is critical for a majority of all human tumors, but mutations in the promoter of the catalytic subunit of telomerase can increase TERT transcription by up to two-fold in tumor cells. However, the physiological events that select for these specific mutations are still unclear. The researchers concluded that TERT promoter mutations are sufficient to overcome the proliferative barrier imposed by telomere shortening without additional tumor-selected mutations.
The opioid epidemic in North America has led to a need for safe pain therapy without respiratory depression. Zebrafish are being explored as an animal model to screen candidate drugs due to their similarities with mammals in physiology and genome. In larval zebrafish, fentanyl induces analgesia and respiratory depression, which can be reversed by μ-opioid receptor antagonists. The larval zebrafish may be a model for opioid-induced respiratory depression and analgesia, and can be used for large-scale drug screening to identify new drug candidates. The small size, ease of production, and external fertilization of zebrafish make them a good candidate for large-scale screening. Respiratory mandible movements can be used as an index of respiratory network activity in zebrafish, and the swimming escape response to nociceptive stimuli can be easily assessed. Zebrafish have evolutionary conserved opioid properties mimicking mammals, and the transparency of the larval zebrafish allows for detailed observation of the respiratory and nociceptive systems. Naloxone is an effective treatment to reverse respiratory depression during opioid overdose, although it also blocks the analgesic properties of opioid drugs, so it cannot be used as an adjunct treatment. The study aims to demonstrate that larval zebrafish can be used for drug discovery and to test current pharmacotherapies to block respiratory depression in opioid-induced respiratory depression.
The study investigates the variations in integrative properties of stellate cells (SCs) in the medial entorhinal cortex in mice. Through ex-vivo patch-clamp recordings from up to 55 SCs per mouse, the study found that integrative properties vary between mice and have a continuous dorsoventral organization, unlike the modularity of grid cell spatial scales. The study suggests that neuron type properties are tuned to circuit-level set points that vary within and between animals. The study further validates the dataset used and assesses the location-dependence of individual electrophysiological features. It concludes that inter-animal variability in key electrophysiological features of SCs exists, suggesting that the set points that establish the underlying integrative properties differ between animals. The study also assesses the impact of experience on electrophysiological features of SCs.
The regulation of sleep pressure in animals is controlled by two processes: a circadian regulator and a homeostatic regulator. A new study explores the role of social signals as a third regulator. In male fruit flies, sleep pressure after sleep deprivation can be counteracted by raising their sexual arousal, either through courtship activity or exposure to female pheromones. Sleep rebound, a hallmark of sleep homeostasis, is observed after sleep deprivation in virtually all animals tested. Social and environmental factors can also modulate sleep, including changes in temperature and food restriction. The study used video tracking machines to monitor and annotate the behaviour of flies during social interaction and found that males who engaged in sexual interaction experienced highly efficient sleep deprivation and exhibited increases in neuronal markers which typically appear after prolonged wakefulness. However, they did not show rebound sleep, suggesting that a memory of the experience or a physical trace in the environment is not responsible for the suppression of rebound. The results show that sex drive is a new paradigm to study the behavioural, neuronal, and genetic connection between environment and sleep.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) to determine the structure of the interaction between the RNA chaperone Hfq and the catabolite repression protein Crc from the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The researchers identified a quaternary structure required for in vivo translational regulation, which they said helped expand the paradigm for Hfq's role in mRNA translation. Specifically, the researchers found that Hfq and Crc act together to translationally repress mRNA target genes by binding to ribosome-binding sequences.
Photoreceptor cells in mice rely on glycolysis for the production of their specialized membrane-rich organelle, the outer segment, which is used for phototransduction, according to a study in eLife. Scientists used genetic alterations to reveal how glycolysis supports the biosynthetic needs of neuronal cells, discovering that fibroblast growth factor signalling regulates glycolysis, while inhibiting lactate synthesis resulted in more ATP moving towards mitochondrial function. The cellular origins and purpose of aerobic glycolysis in the retina, required for the support of photoreceptor function, are still largely unknown.
The Kinesin-12 family of motors has not been well studied, but human protein Kif15 has been linked to spindle mechanics and chromosome movement. In vitro experiments with the full-length hKif15 and its microtubule-targeting factor hTpx2 reveal that hKif15 is a plus-end-directed processive homotetramer that can step against loads of up to 3.5 pN, and it can navigate microtubule networks such as the spindle, effectively switching microtubule tracks at intersections. It is capable of cross-linking microtubules, but hTpx2 inhibits hKif15 stepping when microtubule-bound. Understanding the mechanisms by which these motors operate is important for cancer therapy, as hKif15 is emerging as a potentially important therapeutic target.
TRP channels are sensory cells that convert stimuli into electrical signals for the central nervous system. They function as polymodal sensors for chemical and thermal stimuli. The mechanisms used by chemical ligands to impact TRP channel gating are not well understood. This study has revealed that menthol and AITC (mustard oil) are two distinct types of ligands at the mammalian cold sensor TRPM8. Agonists can be classified as either type I (menthol-like) or type II (AITC-like). The study provides a kinetic model for TRP channel function, with ramifications for TRP channel structure-function analysis and pharmacology.
Researchers have developed a new technique called Mutation Analysis in Pools by Chromosome conformation capture (MAP-C) that allows for the simultaneous characterization of the effects of hundreds of cis or trans-acting mutations on a chromosomal contact. The technique was used to identify three transcription factors, Leu3, Sdd4, and Rgt1, that specify and mediate inducible interchromosomal pairing between HAS1pr-TDA1pr alleles in saturated cultures of Saccharomyces yeast. The coincident, combined binding of all three factors is strongest at the HAS1pr-TDA1pr locus and is specific to saturated conditions. The technique can be used to explore the biochemical mechanism of interchromosomal contacts and to study both the cis and trans dependencies of chromosome conformation.
The article discusses the role of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) in aversive olfactory learning in adult Drosophila. The study found that mAChR-A is required for aversive olfactory learning, particularly in the gamma subtype of Kenyon cells in the mushroom body. mAChR-A inhibits odor responses and is localized in Kenyon cell dendrites. The knockdown of mAChR-A impairs learning-associated depression of odor responses in a mushroom body output neuron. The study suggests that dendritically acting mAChR-A is required for synaptic depression between Kenyon cells and their outputs. The higher expression of mAChR-A in alpha-beta and gamma KCs compared to alpha-prime-beta-prime (α'β') KCs suggests that learning would be impaired by mAChR-A knockdown in alpha-beta or gamma, but not α'β' KCs. These findings provide insight into the physiological function of mAChRs in learning in adult flies.
A novel population of MR1-restricted T cells, which recognise non-microbial antigens was discovered to be part of the normal human T-cell repertoire. The researchers identified MR1T cells in healthy individuals displaying diverse TCRs, and reacting to MR1-expressing cells in the absence of microbial ligands with heterogeneity in function and phenotypic characteristics. The function of MR1 was expanded beyond microbial antigen presentation, which could be vital in human immunity. The presence of these unpredicted MR1-restricted T cells in different individuals could facilitate the production of diverse therapeutic strategies against self-antigen or tumour-associated MR1-ligands.
The study examines the relationship between trial-to-trial variability in behavioral responses during a memory-guided saccade (MGS) task and trial-to-trial variability in widespread gain signals that occur near the time of the behavioral response. The researchers show that the adolescent development of working memory is supported by decreased variability in the amplitude of expression of whole brain states of task-related activity. They demonstrate that the stabilization of widespread gain signals affecting already available cognitive processes underlies the maturation of cognition during adolescence. The results suggest that the reduction of behavioral variability observed during development is the result of stabilizing widespread gain signals. The study also investigates developmental changes in mean behavioral performance and behavioral variability and the extent to which measures of behavioral variability constitute a distinct metric of developmental status. Overall, the study presents longitudinal results from a sample of 126 8-33 year olds demonstrating that adolescent development of working memory is supported by decreased variability in the amplitude of expression of whole brain states of task-related activity.
The document discusses uveitis, a group of inflammatory eye diseases. Uveitis associated with the HLA haplotype B27 is a common subtype and has a unique pattern of ocular leukocyte infiltration, specifically featuring a plasmacytoid and classical dendritic cell infiltrate. The study aimed to provide a better understanding of local immune mechanisms driving human uveitis as they are poorly characterized due to limited available biomaterial and subsequent technical limitations. The study combined single-cell RNA-sequencing with flow cytometry and protein analysis to partially unbiased characterization of leukocytes in the aqueous humor of patients with B27+ AAU compared to patients with HLA-B27-negative AU (B27-AU) and acute infectious endophthalmitis. The study found that lymphocytes predominate in the intraocular infiltrate in B27+ AAU and specifically showed an elevated frequency of plasmacytoid DCs and classical DCs.
Researchers have used a direct electron detector to reconstruct a map at 3.36 Å resolution of the 1.2 MDa F420-reducing hydrogenase (Frh) from methanogenic archaea. Videos frames were aligned using image and particle alignment procedures to overcome the effects of beam-induced motion. The reconstructed density map shows all secondary structure as well as clear side chain densities for most residues. The full coordination of all cofactors in the electron transfer chain (a [NiFe] center, four [4Fe4S] clusters and an FAD) is clearly visible along with a well-defined substrate access channel.
Researchers have discovered that a protein called TRIM28 potently suppresses the expression of human immunodeficiency virus Type 1 (HIV-1) by utilising both SUMO E3 ligase activity and epigenetic adaptor function. TRIM28 inhibits Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) kinase activity or prevents P-TEFb assembly by directly blocking the interaction between CDK9 and Cyclin T1, subsequently inhibiting viral transcription and contributing to HIV-1 latency. The manipulation of TRIM28 and its consequent SUMOylation pathway could be an effective target for developing latency-reversing agents. The authors also discuss the challenges of eradicating the viral reservoir and propose functional cure strategies that involve a long-term control of HIV-1 replication and remission of the symptoms of HIV-1 infection without combined antiretroviral therapy. In addition to TRIM28, the article discusses other epigenetic and transcriptional mechanisms of HIV-1 latency, including histone deacetylases and histone methyltransferases.
A new study has discovered that larval insects not only remember the value of reinforcement ("how much?") but also its quality ("what?"). In experiments on Drosophila larvae treated with sugar and amino acid, and bitter versus high concentration salt, the researchers discovered that such nuanced memories for the quality of reinforcement are unexpected, and pose a challenge to present models of how insect memory is organized. The research was conducted by the University of Champagne-Ardenne, France.
A study using two-photon Ca2+ imaging to assess neuronal microcircuits in premanifest Huntington's disease (HD) in mice has revealed an early pattern of circuit dysregulation in the visual cortex characterised by an increase in activity, enhanced synchronicity and hyperactive neurons. The findings are accompanied by aberrations in behaviour. However, the antidiabetic drug metformin diminishes aberrant Huntingtin protein load and fully restores both early network activity patterns and behavioural aberrations when given chronically and starting early in the premanifest HD pathogenesis. Catching these primal functional changes in early, 'very far from disease onset' stages of HD is likely to be the key to a successful therapy.
Researchers have developed fluorescence activity sensors that are able to monitor nitrate and peptide transport activity in live organisms. The sensors, NiTrac and PepTrac, use yeast fused with fluorescent protein pairs and responded specifically to the addition of nitrate and peptides respectively. The sensors were used to study structure/function relationships and the effects of mutations and regulators on the transporters. The sensors can be used in plants for in planta analyses. This technology is important because nitrogen is the single most limiting nutrient for plants and better understanding of nitrogen uptake can result in improvements in nitrogen use efficiency for crop yields.
The article discusses the role of intraflagellar transport (IFT) in the gliding motility of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. IFT is involved in the assembly and maintenance of cilia and flagella, and has been implicated in sensory and motile ciliary functions. The study shows that IFT trains are coupled to flagellar membrane glycoproteins (FMGs) in a Ca2+-dependent manner, and that dynein-1b motors pull the cell towards the distal tip of the axoneme. The research suggests that IFT plays a major role in adhesion-induced ciliary signaling pathways, and that dynein-1b is responsible for gliding motility.
The article discusses the importance of accurate chromosome transmission during cell division and how it is meditated by the evolutionarily conserved cohesin complex. The complex is composed of two long coiled-coil proteins of the Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) family, a non-SMC protein called Scc3, and a fourth subunit called the α-kleisin. The article shows that multiple and functionally specialized cohesin complexes mediate the establishment and two-step release of sister chromatid cohesion that underlies the production of haploid gametes. In C. elegans, the kleisin subunits REC-8 and COH-3/4 differ between meiotic cohesins and endow them with distinctive properties that specify how cohesins load onto chromosomes and then trigger and release cohesion. Unlike REC-8 cohesin, COH-3/4 cohesin becomes cohesive through a replication-independent mechanism initiated by the DNA double-stranded breaks that induce crossover recombination. The function of COH-3/4 in synaptonemal complex assembly has been uncovered. The article proposes a new model for cohesin function, indicating that the kleisin subunit influences multiple aspects of meiotic cohesin function, including how cohesin complex loads onto meiotic chromosomes, how a complex becomes cohesive once loaded, and the removal of the complex from chromosomes in meiotic prophase.
Scientists have identified a stable core domain of Rift Valley fever phlebovirus (RVFV) non-structural protein (NSs), a key virulence factor that is poorly understood. The protein remains difficult to study because of its tendency to multimerise and intrinsically unfolded domains. It has been found to interfere with the host immune response in three separate ways, and its NSs filament formation in the nuclei of infected cells is a hallmark of RVFV pathology. The stable core domain identified by researchers could be crucial to understanding the virulence factor's assembly in cell nuclei, with implications for immunity against the virus, which has no known treatment for human use.
The ability to remember is critical to our interaction with the environment. To investigate memory formation for rarely reoccurring acoustic patterns, researchers used behavioural manipulation and modelling. Participants detected the emergence of regularly repeating patterns within rapid tone-pip sequences. A few patterns reoccurred every ~3 minutes, and despite all sequences consisting of the same 20 frequencies, reoccurring patterns were associated with a rapidly growing detection-time advantage over novel patterns, which persisted for 7 weeks. The results implicate an interplay between short and long-term integration in memory formation and demonstrate the sensitivity of the human auditory system to sporadically reoccurring structure within the acoustic environment.
Melanocortin obesity syndrome, which involves haploinsufficiency of the melanocortin-4 receptor, has been assumed to be protective with regards to obesity-associated cardiovascular disease. However, a study in mice has found that absence of the melanocortin-4 receptor causes dilated cardiomyopathy, which is characterised by reduced contractility and increased left ventricular diameter. This cardiomyopathy is independent of obesity, as weight-matched diet-induced obese mice did not display systolic dysfunction. Researchers identified MC4R deletion as a novel and potentially clinically important cause of heart failure. Additionally, the study found that Mc4r−/− mice experienced increased ADP stimulated respiratory capacity, which correlated with increased reactive oxygen species production, a mediator of tissue damage. These findings offer insight into the potential cardiovascular risks of melanocortin-4 receptor deficiency.
The process by which cytoplasmic proteins create vesicles for transport between organelles is well understood; however, the reverse process of creating intralumenal vesicles (ILVs) within multivesicular bodies (MVBs) is less understood. Studies over the past decade have identified over 30 proteins, including ESCRT-III complexes, as responsible for ILV formation, viral budding, and cytokinesis. ESCRT-III proteins cycle between an inactive or closed monomeric state in the cytoplasm and an activated or open state in which they polymerize into filaments on the membrane. The exact function of ESCRT-III and Vps4 in membrane scission during ILV formation, viral budding, and cytokinesis is still unclear. However, recent studies indicate that ESCRT-III filaments stabilized by depleting Vps4A and Vps4B create uniform membrane-deforming conical spirals which are assemblies of specific ESCRT-III heteropolymers. Additionally, depleting Vps4 traps ESCRT-III filaments around nascent Gag assemblies during HIV-1 Gag-mediated budding of virus-like particles. These findings suggest a new role for Vps4 in separating ESCRT-III from Gag or other cargo to allow centripetal growth of a neck constricting ESCRT-III spiral. Other structures of ESCRT-III include tubular and meandering filaments. ESCRT-III filaments are remodeled and disassembled by the AAA ATPase Vps4 before and/or after membrane scission, returning individual subunits to their closed state in the cytoplasm.
The COP9-signalosome (CSN) regulates cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL) activity by cleaving Nedd8 from cullins. Although CSN is autoinhibited, it remains unclear how it becomes activated. Through structural and kinetic analyses, the mechanisms and molecular determinants underlying CSN activation and Nedd8 deconjugation were identified. CSN activates through conformational changes involving insert-2 of Csn6 and Rbx1's RING domain, deneddylation through Csn5 glutamate-104, and ejection from the active site of Cul1/Rbx1. This deneddylation-disassembly cycle remodels the cellular CRL network, which regulates many biological processes. Nedd8 protects Skp1/Cul1/F-box (SCF) complexes from Cand1, an exchange factor that accelerates the rate of different FBP/Skp1 substrate receptor-adaptor complex formation, but this is restricted by Nedd8. CSN-mediated deneddylation and Nedd8 re-engagement enable substrate receptor exchange. Cryo-electron microscopy of a CSN-SCFN8Skp2/Cks1 complex produced a model, revealing significant conformational changes in both CSN and neddylated Cul1/Rbx1 vital for regulating CRL activity.
Researchers have discovered a novel form of sexual reproduction in the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans, which they term pseudosexual reproduction. This process involves exclusive uniparental inheritance of nuclear genetic material during bisexual reproduction, where only one copy of the genetic material is received from one of the two parents, and no recombination occurs between the two parental genomes. Mitochondria are inherited from the other parent. Pseudosexual reproduction occurs in lab strains and natural isolates and is controlled by the meiotic recombinase Dmc1. The findings suggest that this mode of microbial reproduction shares features with hybridogenesis in animals, which can generate clonal or hemi-clonal progeny.
The study examines the development of the intrinsic properties of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons in an unbiased manner by combining current-clamp measurements of electrophysiological properties with multi-variate analysis. The study shows that the intrinsic electrical phenotype of these neurons follows a non-linear trajectory, reaching maturity by postnatal day 14, with two developmental transitions occurring between postnatal days 3-5 and 9-11. This analysis allows for the unbiased definition of neuronal type/phenotype that is applicable to a range of research questions. The study provides the first comprehensive analysis of postnatal development of the intrinsic properties of SNc dopaminergic neurons and demonstrates the utility of high-dimensional electrophysiological characterization associated with multi-variate analysis methods to precisely define quantitative changes in electrical phenotype and to investigate the underlying biophysical mechanisms.
The REST transcriptional repressor plays a key role in the transition from neural progenitor to post-mitotic neuron. Mice with a gene trap in the REST gene, eliminating transcription from all coding exons, were used to observe the effects of removing REST prematurely from neural progenitors. Catastrophic DNA damage was found to occur during S-phase of the cell cycle, with long-term consequences, including abnormal chromosome separation, apoptosis, and smaller brains. Analysis suggested that REST-mediated chromatin remodeling is required in neural progenitors for proper S-phase dynamics, and that this function is key for regulating the proper timing of terminal neuronal differentiation. Beta-gal activity programmed from the GT correlated tightly with the pattern of endogenous Rest mRNA. The global GT caused beta-gal activity to match with the expression of the endogenous Rest gene. Loss of REST protein and mRNA levels was found in neural progenitors and E13.5 brains compared with controls. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of E13.5 brains from Cre+, RestGTi/GTi mice indicated ~four-fold reduction in REST occupancy at consensus RE1 sites within 1kb of the glycine receptor and Snap25 transcriptional start sites, in the first exon and intron, respectively. The role of REST in embryonic neurogenesis remains an open question. It was expected that removing REST specifically from neural progenitors would be fatal, but this was not the case. The REST transcriptional repressor was found to play a key role in the DNA damage response during S-phase.
The Rhodosporidium toruloides yeast is a useful model for studying lipid droplets and sustainable chemical production. A method for high-throughput genetics has been developed using sequence-barcoded Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA insertions. 1,337 putative essential genes were identified and functionally profiled, with 150 genes affecting lipid accumulation identified. The method, called RB-TDNAseq, enables functional genomics in a wide variety of fungal species. The study also highlights the biosynthetic potential of R. toruloides and the importance of understanding its unique biosynthetic pathways, gene regulation, and cellular biology for efficient production of terpene-derived and lipid-derived chemicals.
The impact of natural selection and demography on genomic diversity is difficult to distinguish but essential to understand the history of a species. In human genomic data, purifying selection at linked sites (background selection, BGS) and GC-biased gene conversion (gBGC) affect as much as 95% of the genome's variants. The influence of BGS and gBGC on genomic diversity are mainly determined by recombination rate and base composition. Demographic inference based on synonymous sites and non-transcribed regions can lead to strong biases. By conditioning on genomic regions with recombination rates above 1.5 cM/Mb and particular mutation types, a set of SNPs can be identified that is mostly unaffected by BGS or gBGC, which avoids these biases in the reconstruction of human history.
The complexity of cellular signaling pathways hinders the comprehensive characterization of these systems. Forward genetics in model organisms has been used to identify new pathway components and map their connectivity, but divergence between humans and model systems make the analysis of human cells an important goal. Recent methodological advances have enabled the interrogation of biological processes in human cells through genome-wide screens, but inferring functional relationships in complex pathways from these screens remains a major obstacle. In this study, forward genetic screens were conducted to investigate the regulatory mechanisms of canonical WNT signaling pathways in haploid human cells. The screens identified new regulatory features and uncovered a requirement for the glycophosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthetic machinery and glypicans to amplify WNT responses by R-spondins. By combining the results of these screens, epistatic relationships were confirmed for known regulators and predicted for new ones.
The document discusses the dendritic physiology of hypothalamic oxytocinergic magnocellular neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and how they release peptide from both their axon terminals and dendrites. The study uses a combination of electrical and optical recording techniques to evaluate the activity-induced calcium influx in proximal versus distal dendrites of these neurons. The results reveal that the dendrites of these neurons are weak conductors of somatic voltage changes but activity-induced dendritic calcium influx can be robustly regulated by both osmosensitive and non-osmosensitive ion channels located along the dendritic membrane. The study provides a more detailed mechanistic understanding of how the brain naturally regulates release of endogenous oxytocin which may facilitate development of new approaches for therapeutic manipulation of central oxytocin signaling.
An experiment found that the occipital cortex of blind people synchronizes to the rhythm of speech, suggesting that it processes low-level acoustic features relevant for language understanding. Additionally, speech comprehension was selectively observed in the primary visual cortex in blind individuals, indicating that it is at the interface between speech perception and comprehension. Blind individuals also had enhanced functional connectivity between temporal and occipital cortices that are sensitive to speech intelligibility and altered directionality compared to sighted individuals. This suggests that the occipital cortex of blind people does not fully abstract from reorganized sensory inputs and may adopt an architecture that allows for tracking speech material.
The document discusses the role of mesenchymal-derived cells in the development of tumors associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and cancer. The activation of mTORC1, caused by dysregulated upstream signaling through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), PTEN, AKT, and TSC1-TSC2, is observed in these conditions, and response to treatment using mTOR inhibitors such as sirolimus and everolimus has been observed. The study reports the generation of a mouse model with a Prrx1-cre transgene to disrupt a conditional Tsc2 allele in the lateral plate mesoderm. Observations showed that mice with Tsc2-deficient mesenchymal progenitors caused aberrant morphogenic signals, abnormal tortuous, dilated vessels prominent in the forelimbs, and shortened lifespans. A Tsc2/mTORC1 expression signature identified in Tsc2-deficient fibroblasts was also increased in bladder cancers with TSC1/TSC2 mutations in the
Researchers have shown, through testing the effect of immobilisation on chick embryos, that YAP activation leads to the expression of NOTCH ligand JAG2 in muscle fibers, which regulates the number of fetal muscle progenitors via NOTCH in a non-cell-autonomous manner. Muscle development, growth and regeneration rely on muscle stem cells, and the paired homeobox transcription factors, PAX3 and PAX7, define the pool of muscle stem cells during developmental, postnatal and regenerative myogenesis. The study identifies a mechanism acting downstream of muscle contraction, where YAP activates JAG2 expression in muscle fibers, fertilizing the pool of fetal muscle progenitors.
A recent study shows that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) may play a role in the synthesis of new peptides. The study found that a large fraction of lncRNAs expressed in cells from six different species was associated with ribosomes, and the patterns of ribosome protection are consistent with the translation of short peptides. LncRNAs have similar coding potential and sequence constraints as evolutionary young protein coding sequences, indicating that they play an important role in de novo protein evolution. The study also shows that lncRNAs tend to contain few introns, are expressed at low levels, exhibit weak sequence constraints, and have limited phylogenetic conservation. The evidence of lncRNAs being associated with ribosomes suggests that they could be an important source of new peptides.
The phragmoplast, a microtubule-based structure, directs vesicles carrying cell wall components in plant cells during cell division. The mechanism guiding the phragmoplast is mostly unknown, but recent research showed that myosin VIII links phragmoplast microtubules to the cell cortex via actin filaments, providing a molecular mechanism for steering phragmoplast expansion. Plant cells still divide without actin, but actin has been proposed to stabilize the phragmoplast and link it to the cell cortex. It remains unclear how actin contributes to phragmoplast function specifically, especially compared to its role in the preprophase band, which is present on the cell cortex just prior to nuclear envelope breakdown. A new study uses moss protonemata to study the role of actin in phragmoplast guidance, as all dividing protonemata have actin in the phragmoplast even though they do not make a preprophase band. The research found that myosin VIII is crucial for ensuring that the phragmoplast expands to the predeteRmined cortical division site and that Myo8A-GFP localizes diffusely throughout the cytoplasm and at the cell cortex. The actin filaments apparently move the particle along at a velocity of 0.65±0.57 μm/s.
Researchers have identified two new genes, Gm7068 and Tex40, that they believe are essential for mammalian fertilisation. The former, known as CatSpere, and the latter, referred to as CatSperz, are proteins that produce a CatSper ion channel complex. The absence of CatSperz was found to result in poor sperm function and sub-fertility in mice, although this was partly alleviated by using sperm collected from female mice, suggesting that the proteins could be important in sperm development in a female reproductive environment.

Researchers have identified a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), lncEGFL7OS, that is critical for human angiogenesis, the process by which new blood vessels are formed from pre-existing vessels. The lncRNA is abundant in highly vascularized human tissues and its presence promotes angiogenesis whereas its absence inhibits this process, suggesting that it has therapeutic potential. The potential of anti-angiogenic therapies for several diseases, such as heart disease, tumour growth, and age-related macular degeneration, has been explored before, but resistance to such therapies has been encountered. The identification of novel human angiogenesis mechanisms, such as the lncRNA lncEGFL7OS, provides important insights and potential targets for the treatment of angiogenesis-related conditions.
A small molecule called EMD 57033 has been shown to stimulate the ATPase activity and contractility of myofilaments. It binds to an allosteric pocket in the myosin motor domain, and increases ATP hydrolysis, actin and nucleotide binding site coupling, and actin affinity in the presence of ATP. EMD 57033 has been found to protect myosin against heat stress and thermal denaturation. The molecule can improve the treatment of heart failure, myopathies, and protein misfolding diseases. EMD 57033 displays a wider spectrum of activities than previously associated with small, drug-like compounds. The molecule can restore ATPase and motile activity to heat-inactivated β-cardiac myosin. EMD 57033 acts in a concentration-dependent allosteric manner with a maximal activation of basal ATPase and total myosin activity greater than for fully activated myosin. Molecular docking studies show that EMD 57033 binds near the base of the lever arm and has two slightly different clusters of binding poses.
The study investigates the conformational cycle of the heterodimer family of ABC exporters that extrude toxic molecules across cell membranes, focusing on BmrCD from Bacillus subtilis. The study reveals a previously unknown structural intermediate of the nucleotide binding sites (NBSs), arising from asymmetric configuration of catalytically inequivalent NBSs. The conformational cycle is driven exclusively by ATP hydrolysis, providing direct evidence of divergence in the mechanism of ABC exporters. The study sheds light on the role of catalytic asymmetry in mammalian ABC transporters and could aid in developing treatments for associated diseases.
The majority of mammalian promoters are CpG islands, which are regions of high CG density that require protection from DNA methylation to be functional. The mechanisms that mediate this unmethylated state are still unclear. To address this question, researchers have developed a method to insert hundreds of sequence variants at the same genomic site in mouse embryonic stem cells and quantify the contribution of various sequence motifs towards the resulting DNA methylation state. Their findings establish the principal role of transcription factor binding sites rather than CG density alone in defining the DNA methylation state and transcriptional competence of CpG islands. The method also allows the analysis of methylation changes observed in normal differentiation and in cancer states.
Researchers have discovered that a protein known as polymerase I transcription and release factor (PTRF), which plays a critical role in caveolae formation, also regulates ribosomal RNA transcription in mature adipocytes. Ribosomal transcription is a vital step in ribosome biogenesis, and the study shows that PTRF acutely regulates ribosomal transcription in response to metabolic challenges in adipocytes. The study suggests PTRF has a crucial physiological role in maintaining adipocyte allostasis, the process by which a biological system maintains stability in response to changes in the environment. The researchers also found that multiple post-translational modifications of PTRF provide mechanistic bases for its regulation, and that its role in ribosomal transcriptional efficiency is likely relevant to many additional physiological situations of cell growth and organismal metabolism.
Microglia are specialized immune cells found in the brain that have a variety of functions, including cleaning up cellular debris and forming connections between neurons during development. In zebrafish, embryonic microglial precursors migrate into the brain and retina through hyaloid blood vessels, and this colonization depends on factors such as neuronal differentiation and a signaling pathway involving IL34 and CSF-R. The number of microglial precursors in the retina increases gradually through migration rather than proliferation, and they enter the retina through the neurogenic region. Furthermore, they are associated with the developing hyaloid blood vessels as they enter the vitreous space between the lens and the neural retina, and then move along the blood vessel surfaces before infiltrating the neural retina.
A study on how fluid flow shear promotes cooperative behavior in microbial communities has found that flow shear enables and promotes social behavior in microbes by increasing the fragmentation rate of groups thereby limiting the spread of cheating strains. The study shows that social structures arise naturally from the advection-diffusion-reaction model as self-reproducing Turing patterns. The results also suggest that greater social complexity amongst planktonic species would be observed in regions of large shear, such as by rocks and river banks. The study may have implications for a wide variety of social ecosystems ranging from phytoplankton flowing in oceanic currents to opportunistic bacteria colonizing blood or industrial pipelines.
The detachment of newborn neurons from the neuroepithelium is crucial for correct neuronal architecture and functional circuitry, a process known as delamination. The mechanisms behind delamination are poorly understood, but new research has used live-tissue and super-resolution imaging to reveal a centrosome-nucleated wheel-like microtubule configuration in chick and mouse neuroepithelial cells that maintain adherens-junctions while actin maintains microtubules. During neuronal delamination, acto-myosin constriction creates a tunnel-like actin-microtubule configuration through which the centrosome translocates. This movement requires inter-dependent actin and microtubule activity, and the findings identify new cytoskeletal configurations and regulatory relationships that may inform mechanisms underlying pathological epithelial cell detachment.
A study has shown that the protein RNG105/caprin1 has an essential role in long-term memory formation in mice by regulating dendritic mRNA localization. Mice with RNG105 deficiency had significantly reduced synaptic strength and plasticity, impaired structural plasticity, and severe defects in spatial and contextual learning tasks. Genome-wide profiling showed that RNG105 deficiency impaired the asymmetric somato-dendritic localization of mRNAs, particularly those encoding regulators of AMPAR surface expression. The study suggests that local regulation of synaptic efficacy is important for proper networking of neurons and memory formation, and that RNG105 is a key regulator in this process. The study also noted that components of RNA granules, such as RNG105, have been implicated in brain disorders and that RNG105 deficiency in mice caused autism spectrum disorder-like behavior.
This document discusses the importance of cellular adhesion in sustaining collective functions of microbial aggregates, and investigates the evolutionary origins of adhesion and the emergence of groups of genealogically unrelated cells. The document proposes a game-theoretical model to study the evolution of adhesiveness as a continuous trait and highlights that adhesiveness is costly, but sticky individuals are favored as soon as their frequency exceeds a certain threshold, even in absence of the selective pressures favoring large groups. The model focuses on populations where groups disperse after individual reproduction and emerge anew from a well-mixed pool at the next generation. The document shows that the interest in knowing which mechanisms are effective in the evolution of pristine modes of collective organization has recently spawned numerous theoretical efforts to model microbial assemblages.
Researchers have studied the placement of Placozoans, a morphologically simple animal, in the animal phylogeny to understand the evolution of complex animal traits. The study used site-heterogeneous substitution models to add genomes from placozoans to a large dataset and determine support for the sister-group relationship between Cnidaria and Placozoa or Cnidaria and Bilateria. The study found evidence of compositional heterogeneity and cautioned against ignoring placozoans' relevance to discussions of early animal evolution. The study also described the importance of appropriate statistical tests to control systematic error and showed support for both Planulozoa and Ctenophora as the sister group to remaining metazoans, depending on the orthologues selected to construct the matrix.
This study found that the olfactory epithelium of zebrafish embryos is primarily comprised of microvillous sensory neurons derived from the cranial neural crest, whereas previously it was thought that all olfactory sensory neurons were derived from the olfactory placode. This finding offers important insights into the initial development of the olfactory system and may also provide a better understanding of neurogenesis as a whole. The study used live confocal imaging, photoconversion-based fate mapping, and laser ablation to track the migration and differentiation of neural crest cells in zebrafish embryos. The results demonstrated a critical role for the neural crest specifier gene Sox10 in the development of microvillous neurons, which are responsible for detecting pheromones, nucleotides, and/or amino acids in the olfactory epithelium.
The transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) is a 10-subunit protein complex that serves a dual function in transcription initiation and DNA repair. Mutations in TFIIH have been linked to various human diseases, including cancer and premature aging. The TFIIH core complex is composed of seven subunits and is responsible for DNA repair, while the CdK activating kinase subcomplex is required for transcription initiation. Previous structural work has provided only partial insight into the architecture of TFIIH and its interactions within transcription pre-initiation complexes. A new study presents the complete structure of the human TFIIH core complex, determined by phase-plate cryo-electron microscopy, which allows for the detailed mapping of previously unresolved human disease mutations and provides insights into the molecular basis of TFIIH assembly and regulation. The structure also suggests a function for p62 in the regulation of XPD.
Researchers have identified a novel molecular mechanism for COVID-19 that involves an imbalance in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and an increase in bradykinin levels. This imbalance is predicted to cause vascular dilation, vascular permeability, and hypotension, which can explain the symptoms observed in COVID-19 patients. The study found significant upregulation of genes involved in hyaluronic acid (HA) synthesis, which can combine with the vascular hyperpermeability caused by bradykinin to negatively impact gas exchange in the lungs. The study suggests that understanding the molecular basis of COVID-19 may lead to effective treatments.
The cytomatrix at the active zone (CAZ) is a macromolecular complex that facilitates the supply of release-ready synaptic vesicles for neurotransmitter release at synapses. The synaptic ribbon serves a dual function as a conduit for the diffusion of synaptic vesicles and a platform for vesicles to fuse distal to the plasma membrane via compound fusion. Two-color laser scanning methods were used to allow single labeled vesicles to be observed throughout the full extent of the ribbon in voltage-clamped synaptic terminals while the ribbon and cell border were imaged with a second fluorescent label. Single vesicle imaging found that during brief depolarization, membrane-proximal vesicles underwent selective fusion while new vesicles were recruited at the opposite pole. Crowd-surfing was observed in which the vesicles passively diffuse along the ribbon. Lastly, during sustained depolarization, vesicle trafficking was also observed.
The document describes the genetic disorder Hutchinson-Gilford progeria (HGPS), which causes premature ageing due to a mutation in the LMNA gene, resulting in a truncated form of lamin A called progerin. Progerin affects the nuclear lamina, a proteinaceous meshwork that regulates proliferation and chromatin organization, and leads to loss of heterochromatin and premature senescence. The authors developed an inducible cellular system to model HGPS and found that progerin's interaction with the alpha-isoform of the lamina-associated polypeptide 2 (LAP2α) is disrupted, which is central to the molecular pathology of progeria. The authors also demonstrate that increasing LAP2α levels rescue progerin-induced proliferation defects and loss of H3K27me3, and lowering LAP2 levels exacerbates progerin-induced defects. Finally, the authors show that increasing progerin levels lead to defective proliferation and an increase in DNA damage levels in a dose-dependent manner, and these effects can be suppressed by exogenous telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT).
Researchers generated skeletal muscle myoblasts from human induced pluripotent stem cells using a transgene-free protocol. The resulting myoblasts were characterised as a PAX3+/MYOD1+ skeletal myogenic lineage with a fetal-like transcriptome signature. The myoblasts demonstrated the ability to differentiate and regenerate reserve cells in response to growth factor-free media. The researchers established that these myoblasts could also model various muscular dystrophies and are a valuable tool for investigating human myogenesis and developing muscle stem cell therapeutics.
The study investigated the hypothesized relationship between the intrinsic hyperexcitability of F-type motoneurons and the subsequent degeneration of motoneurons in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Contrary to standard belief, F-type motoneurons involved with fast-contracting muscle fibers do not seem to have increased excitability in mice with ALS mutations. Instead, S-type motoneurons, which innervate slow-contracting fibers and are known to be resistant in ALS, actually displayed intrinsic hyperexcitability. Two populations of motoneurons were observed in neonatal mice, and differences in electrical and morphological properties were found between a so-called immediate firing pattern, and a delayed firing pattern. Further evidence indicated that both immediate and delayed firing motoneurons are alpha-motoneurons that innervate extrafusal muscle fibers, and not gamma-motoneurons.
This document discusses the genetic basis for variation in wing pigmentation patterns in rock pigeons, with a focus on the gene NDP as a candidate for controlling this diversity. Whole-genome sequencing revealed allele-specific expression differences in NDP indicating cis-regulatory divergence between ancestral and melanistic alleles. The study also found that both coding and regulatory variation in the same gene drives wing pattern diversity, and post-domestication introgression supplied potentially advantageous melanistic alleles to feral populations of this ubiquitous urban bird. The document notes that while numerous studies have identified key genes that determine variation in the types of pigments that are produced by melanocytes, considerably less is known about the genetic mechanisms that determine pigment patterning throughout the entire epidermis and within individual epidermal appendages.
Researchers have determined the crystal structures of a homologue of glutamate transporters in both apo and ions-only bound conformations, shedding light on how they function on a structural level. Glutamate transporters play a crucial role in maintaining steep trans-membrane glutamate gradients to prevent excitotoxicity caused by overstimulation of glutamate receptors. Dysfunction of glutamate transporters is linked to neurological disorders, poor recovery from stroke, and traumatic brain injuries. The study found that ion binding to the site located deep in the core of the transport domain triggers structural changes that are propagated to an extracellular gate, freeing sites and moving them into positions that facilitate the transport cycle.
New research has discovered the Chip/LDB-SSDP (ChiLS) complex as the protein that specifically binds to the NPF motif of Pygo proteins, which is needed for Wnt signaling. ChiLS recognises NPF motifs in nuclear factors including Runt/RUNX2 and Drosophila ARID1, and binds to Groucho/TLE. ChiLS holds key importance in avoiding cancer, as it plays a pivotal role in embryonic development and adult stem cell compartments. This integration of inputs from lineage and signal-responsive factors causes the context-dependence of TCF/LEF.
Efficient coding in sensory neurons requires adaptation, but it is unclear how neurons maintain a stable representation of external stimuli. A stable representation is maintained when efficiency is optimized by a population of neurons rather than by neurons individually, with spike-frequency adaptation and E/I balanced recurrent connectivity emerging as solutions to a global cost-accuracy tradeoff. The network will redistribute sensory responses from highly excitable neurons to less excitable neurons as the cost of neural activity increases. By applying this framework to an orientation coding network, it is found that neural adaptation produces a reliable representation of the stimulus while minimizing metabolic cost.
Male and female molecules work together to optimize fertility during mating, with seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) being crucial regulators of these changes. SFPs are produced within male reproductive tracts and transferred to females during mating. SFPs mediate an array of post-mating responses such as changes in egg production, elevated feeding rates, higher activity or reduced sleep levels, and reduced sexual receptivity. Seminal Sex Peptide (SP) binds to a male's sperm stored in a female, persisting there for approximately 10 days, resulting in changes in the female's behavior and physiology that increase the reproductive success of the mating pair. However, induction of these changes can indirectly benefit his rival as the female's physiology will have already been primed for reproduction by her first mate's SFPs. In many animal species, females mate with more than one male, and these conflicts drive the evolution of male reproductive traits including optimal sperm numbers, morphology, and seminal protein sequences. Rival males tailor their ejaculates accordingly. Here, the study shows that SFPs from one male can directly benefit a rival's sperm by binding sperm that she had stored from a previous male and rescue the sperm utilization and fertility defects of an SP-deficient first-male.
Scientists studied the function of the Kif5aa protein during the formation of the retinotectal circuit in zebrafish. Using targeted gene disruption, they found that loss of Kif5aa resulted in a delay in axon growth and impaired mitochondrial transport and synaptic transmission. They also discovered that reduced presynaptic activity led to increased expression of neurotrophic factor 3 (Ntf3) which in turn promoted excessive branching of retinal axons. The study sheds light on the importance of anterograde intracellular transport in establishing neural circuits and reveals a retrograde signaling pathway that controls axonal branching based on levels of synaptic activity.
Researchers have identified the gene TRIM28 as a potential therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. The study found that TRIM28 regulates the toxic accumulation of both alpha-synuclein, found in Parkinson’s, and tau, found in Alzheimer’s. Lowering levels of TRIM28 was found to rescue toxicity in animal models of these diseases. The study also identified several common mechanisms between the two diseases, suggesting that targeting the root cause – protein accumulation – could be an effective therapeutic strategy.
The study investigates the ability of infants and adults to extract crossmodal statistics implicitly. Event-related potentials were used to test the hypothesis that infants are more sensitive to crossmodal statistics than adults. Participants were passively exposed to frequent standard audio-visual combinations, rare recombinations of these standard stimuli, and a rare audio-visual deviant. The results showed that while both infants and adults differentiated between rare deviants and standards involving early neural processing stages, only infants were sensitive to crossmodal statistics. A second experiment revealed that adults differentiated recombined and standard combinations when crossmodal combinations were task-relevant. The study suggests that infants have powerful mechanisms for extracting the statistical properties of their sensory input without any instructions, explicit feedback, or intentional awareness.
Researchers tested the hypothsesis that the endogenous nucleus accumbens (NAc) opioid system promotes appetitive approach to calorie-dense food in states of relatively high satiety. They conducted a study on rats performing a cued approach task and concluded that NAc opioid activation promotes approach to high-fat foods despite a lack of caloric need, suggesting that these receptors contribute to a neural mechanism that drives intake of calorie-dense food specifically in the state of satiety. The study could have implications for understanding the neural mechanisms that guide seeking of highly palatable foods to help combat epidemics of obesity and diabetes by reducing caloric intake.
The document discusses the importance of understanding how climate-mediated biotic interactions shape thermal niche width in the context of global change. The concept of the ecological niche and thermal performance curve (TPC) are introduced, with the TPC being a way to quantitatively measure an organism's thermal niche. The document describes a model predicting that interspecific competitors will narrow the width of the TPC, causing a species' optimal breeding temperature to diverge from that of its competitor, which is tested in the Asian burying beetle Nicrophorus nepalensis. The study confirms that competition with their primary competitor, blowflies, causes the divergence, but also shows that intraspecific cooperation enables beetles to recover their optimal breeding temperature and outcompete blowflies. The study uses laboratory and field experiments to test the predicted relationship between fundamental and realized TPCs and quantifies the beetle's realized TPC in the context of interspecific competition. The document concludes that understanding how abiotic and biotic factors interact to affect organismal performance and fitness is critical for predicting responses to climate change.
Hygroreception, the ability to sense humidity levels, is a critical sensory modality for many animals to avoid desiccation. In the antenna of the fruit fly Drosophila, humidity detection occurs largely in a three-chambered cavity called the sacculus, which contains a small number of sensilla that act as hygroreceptors and thermoreceptors. The molecular basis of hygroreception remained unknown until recently. The study finds that Obp59a, a member of a large family of secreted proteins, is responsible for hygrosensation in the antenna of the fruit fly Drosophila. Obp59a mutants lacking this protein are defective in three hygrosensory behaviors, one operating over seconds, one over minutes and one over hours. Strikingly, loss of Obp59a and humidity response leads to an increase in desiccation resistance. The results enhance our understanding of hygroreception, Obp function, and desiccation resistance, which is critical to insect survival, especially with increasing climate change.
The hormone auxin plays a crucial role in regulating the development of plants, particularly in the rhythmic production of organs at the shoot apex. The spatio-temporal dynamics of auxin gradients were unknown, so researchers used quantitative imaging to demonstrate that auxin carries high-definition graded information not only in space but also in time. During organogenesis, temporal patterns of auxin arise from rhythmic centrifugal waves of high auxin travelling through the tissue faster than growth. Temporal integration of auxin concentration is required to trigger the auxin-dependent transcription associated with organogenesis. This provides a mechanism to temporally differentiate sites of organ initiation and exemplifies how spatio-temporal positional information can be used to create rhythmicity in the growth of plants.
Researchers have investigated the contributions of glia to Huntington's disease by profiling the gene expression alterations in Drosophila expressing human mutant Huntingtin (mHTT). They compared these changes to those observed in HD human and HD mice striata and found that downregulation of genes involved in synapse assembly mitigated pathogenesis and behavioral deficits. They also found that reducing dNRXN3 function in glia was sufficient to improve the phenotype of flies expressing mHTT in neurons, suggesting that mHTT's toxic effects in glia ramify throughout the brain. The study demonstrated that HD pathogenesis is driven by upregulation of genes involved in the actin cytoskeleton and inflammation, but that neurons compensate by downregulating genes involved in synaptic biology and calcium signaling. In addition, glial cells contribute to synapse formation, function, and elimination, and healthy glia can improve the disease phenotype in HD mice. The study identified clusters of upregulated and downregulated DEGs in response to glial mHTT expression, containing genes involved in transcription and chromatin remodeling, amino acid metabolism, cell proliferation, cytokine signaling/innate immunity, arachidonic acid metabolism, and steroid synthesis, as well as synapse assembly, calcium ion transport, immune system regulation, phagocytosis, mRNA processing, and fatty acid degradation.
Reduced expression of the ion channel subunit KChIP2 is consistently observed in numerous cardiac pathologies, but it remains unknown if KChIP2 loss is merely a symptom or if it is involved in disease development. Using rat and human derived cardiomyocytes, researchers have identified a previously unobserved transcriptional capacity for cardiac KChIP2 critical in maintaining electrical stability, which in turn prevents reentrant arrhythmias. KChIP2 transcriptionally represses miRNAs miR-34b and miR-34c, which subsequently target key depolarizing (INa) and repolarizing (Ito) currents altered in cardiac disease, confirming the KChIP2/miR-34 axis as a central regulator in developing electrical dysfunction and reveals miR-34 as a therapeutic target for treating arrhythmogenesis in heart disease.
Anxiety disorders affect a significant portion of Americans and place a burden on the healthcare system. There is a need to understand the neural mechanisms underlying anxiety to identify targets for treatment. This study used data-driven whole-brain measures of neural activity (magnetoencephalography) and connectivity (fMRI) to identify regions of the brain that contribute to sustained anxiety. The study found that elevated neural activity and connectivity during threat were present in a single brain region, the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), which plays a role in attention orientation and may contribute to hypervigilance in anxiety disorders. Understanding the neural mechanisms underlying prolonged periods of elevated anxiety could identify targets for treatment, particularly given that clinical anxiety is characterized by prolonged periods of elevated anxiety.
A new study has shown that climate change is accelerating plant development, with warmer temperatures advancing plant phenology and flowering and bud bursts occurring earlier, resulting in a longer growing season. Researchers constructed a full life-cycle model of Arabidopsis thaliana to examine the importance of timing advances for a stable life history strategy. They found that temperature control of flowering time limits seed set of winter annuals to an ambient temperature window which coincides with temperature-sensitive switch in seed dormancy state. The researchers also discovered hidden fitness constraints and identified non-obvious selection pressures involved in plant behaviour.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus is responsible for maintaining 24-hour rhythms of physiology and behavior in mammals, and transcriptional output of the SCN is critical for this. A recent study has used RNA-seq combined with laser-capture microdissection (LCM) to investigate the SCN transcriptome in more detail. The study identified many hundreds of novel cycling transcripts and revealed that temporal variation in a specific group of genes plays a role in modulating light-induced phase resetting of the circadian clock. An early microarray study of the SCN identified 650 genes displaying circadian oscillations; however, this number was limited by the number of genes surveyed, the low signal-to-noise ratio of certain genes, and the use of experimental samples likely to include a large proportion of the surrounding hypothalamic tissue. In contrast, the current study has identified over 4500 genes that show sinusoidal patterns of expression in the SCN. Of particular interest, the study identified 766 genes that unexpectedly peaked twice, near the start and end of the dark phase, and this group is significantly enriched for synaptic transmission genes that are crucial for light-induced phase shifting of the circadian clock. The study indicates that transcriptional timing in the SCN can gate clock resetting mechanisms.
This document discusses the biophysical investigation of genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVIs) and their potential use in measuring membrane potential without the use of electrodes. The document focuses on the GEVI ArcLight and the close variant Arclight', and their behavior at both a single-molecule and macroscopic level. The investigation revealed new features of ArcLight's behavior, including millisecond-scale fluorescence fluctuations in single molecules and a previously unreported delay prior to macroscopic fluorescence onset. The study also led to the development of a novel GEVI with improved kinetics called ArcLightning. Additionally, the investigation confirms that ArcLight fluorescence changes are driven by voltage sensor conformational changes rather than direct response to membrane potential or voltage-driven ion concentration changes. The document concludes by discussing the potential for GEVI improvement through attenuation or elimination of intrinsic noise due to internal dynamics of the GFP moiety.
This document reports that cells utilize tRNA U34-thiolation to regulate carbon and nitrogen metabolic homeostasis in order to appropriately commit to growth and proliferation. Specifically, tRNA thiolation deficient cells exhibit signs of amino acid starvation and have altered metabolic homeostasis with decreased nucleotide biosynthesis and increased trehalose synthesis. It is shown that tRNA thiolation regulates central carbon and nitrogen metabolic outputs by controlling flux towards storage carbohydrates. The study presents a general biochemical explanation for how inorganic phosphate homeostasis regulates commitments to different arms of carbon and nitrogen metabolism, thereby determining how cells commit to a 'growth' or 'starvation' state.
A study has found that genes from the bacterium Escherichia coli can replace essential genes in yeast with few negative effects on growth rate. After testing 51 bacterial genes, researchers found that 31 (61%) could replace their yeast orthologs under specific conditions. They concluded that certain biological processes have remained largely unchanged since the eukaryote-prokaryote split two billion years ago, with the heme biosynthesis pathway proving particularly interchangeable. The study supports the ortholog-function conjecture that genes retain ancestral function over long periods of time.
Linear multivalent proteins can undergo two types of gelation transitions - gelation without phase separation or gelation driven by phase separation. A team of researchers used computer simulations and the theory of associative polymers to uncover the physical properties of intrinsically disordered linkers that determine the extent to which gelation of linear multivalent proteins is driven by phase separation. They found that the molecular determinants of gelation with and without phase separation are determined by the physical properties of linkers, which include the lengths of linkers and their sequence-specific effective solvation volumes. The effective solvation volumes are referenced to the volume occupied if that linker lacked a bias to be well solvated or poorly solvated. The researchers also discovered the effective solvation volumes reflect the average volumes occupied by linkers. The effects of inter-residue attractions offset the effects of inter-residue repulsions, then VES was approximately equal to zero. 

Transcription in zebrafish embryos is regulated by a competition between histones and transcription factors for DNA binding, with non-DNA-bound histones setting the time for the onset of transcription. The reduction in nuclear histone concentration that coincides with genome activation allows transcription factors to successfully compete for DNA binding. In addition, an increase in the amount of histones injected into zebrafish embryos delays the onset of transcriptional activation, while reducing the levels of specific histones speeds up the process. These findings suggest that histones act as excess repressors during zygotic genome activation in zebrafish.
This scientific study explores the turnover rates of individual proteins in the collagen and glycoprotein phases of connective tissue extracellular matrix (ECM) in rat Achilles tendon. The study utilized isotope labeling, mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics to calculate the turnover rates of individual proteins within the ECM phases of tendon. The results show that there are ~1000-fold differences in protein turnover rates, and overall faster protein turnover within the glycoprotein-rich interfascicular matrix compared to the collagen-rich fascicular matrix. The study provides insights into the complexity of proteome dynamics in tendon, which is required to maintain tissue homeostasis. The findings could help reduce the risk of injury in connective tissues, and the techniques used in the study could be applied to interrogate alterations in connective tissue protein turnover with aging and/or disease.
Platelet-neutrophil interactions play an important role in both innate immunity and the development of diseases such as deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction, and stroke. Under flow, platelet priming induces the activation of integrin αIIbβ3, which mediates neutrophil and T-cell binding. Binding of platelet αIIbβ3 to SLC44A2 on neutrophils leads to the production of highly prothrombotic neutrophil extracellular traps. A polymorphism in SLC44A2 that is protective against venous thrombosis results in severely impaired binding to both activated αIIbβ3 and VWF-primed platelets. Platelets exhibit a tunable activation response determined by agonist availability, and they also have important roles as immune cells by aiding in targeting of bacteria by leukocytes. Platelet-leukocyte interactions influence the development of inflammatory cardiovascular conditions, and leukocytes can indirectly interact with platelets through integrins. Genome-wide association studies have identified a panel of genes with well-described influences upon coagulation and thrombotic risk, as well as additional risk loci for VTE, but with no known role in coagulation. The A1-GPIbα interaction leads to priming of platelets, activation of αIIbβ3, and minimal α-granule release. Activated αIIbβ3 is capable of binding directly to leukocytes via a direct interaction with SLC44A2, and blocking αIIbβ3 significantly decreased platelet-leukocyte interactions.
Researchers have identified the ways in which information about nutrient availability is used to regulate neuroendocrine signalling and developmental plasticity in the small neuronal network of Caenorhabditis elegans. By comparing the levels of dauer formation in worms under crowded and uncrowded conditions, researchers identified the CMK-1 calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I as a key player in regulating the balance of anti-dauer insulin-like peptide signals secreted by neurons in the worm brain, to promote reproductive development. The study found that mutations in the cmk-1 CaMKI gene cause inappropriate dauer formation under well-fed conditions, disrupting the balance of signals used to regulate dauer formation.
The study focuses on the VDP behavior of the ELK voltage-gated potassium channels in the brain, which helps dampen the hyperexcitability of neurons. The authors show that VDP of these channels involves a structural interaction between the intracellular N-terminal eag domain and C-terminal CNBHD, which stabilizes the opening of the channel. Through various techniques, the authors conclude that VDP in ELK channels involves a slow rearrangement of the interaction between the eag domain and the CNBHD that is coupled to channel opening. Additionally, the article discusses the importance of KCNH channels in nervous system function, cardiac physiology, and cancer biology.
A new study has identified a new cell that could be used for regenerative medicine purposes without the risk of tumor formation upon transplantation. Researchers identified a defined and optimized culture condition using a cellular microarray technology that supports the propagation of a new cell population with mesodermal properties, called intermediate mesodermal progenitor (IMP) cells, from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Upon appropriate stimulation, IMP cells are capable of generating a sub-population of kidney cells, but do not differentiate into other mesodermally-derived tissues, such as blood and heart. This could provide a homogenous, non-tumorigenic source for regenerative medicine purposes, and could assist studies that aim to identify the mechanisms that regulate human mesoderm development.
Researchers have reported a high-quality draft assembly of the genome of Hi5 cells from the lepidopteran insect pest Trichoplusia ni. The genome contains 14,037 protein-coding genes and has been assembled into 28 chromosomes. The chemoreception and detoxification gene families reveal T. ni-specific gene expansions that may explain its widespread distribution and rapid adaptation to insecticides. Additionally, the researchers have established genome editing and single-cell cloning protocols to enable the use of Hi5 cells as a model system for studying small RNAs ex vivo. The assembly of the T. ni genome provides insights into pest control and allows for the study of small RNAs in insects.
The article discusses the importance of understanding allosteric behavior in enzymes and identifying communication pathways in order to develop alternative strategies for inhibitor development to combat antimicrobial resistance. Through simulations, the article studies the allosteric effects and communication pathways in two prototypical class A β-lactamases, TEM-1 and KPC-2, which are determinants of antibiotic resistance. The simulations reveal communication pathways that occur through cooperative coupling of loop dynamics and suggest that clinically important variations may affect or be driven by differences in allosteric behavior. The article also discusses the rise of antimicrobial resistance and the challenge it poses in fighting common and severe bacterial infections, reducing the viability of interventions such as orthopedic surgery, and threatening new antibiotics coming to the market.
Researchers have developed an algorithm that could predict the future evolution of asexual cells, such as pathogens, based on a sample of genome sequences. By examining the branching patterns of reconstructed genealogical trees, the researchers were able to predict successful strains by identifying information about the relative fitness of the cells. The algorithm was tested on historical data regarding seasonal influenza A/H3N2 virus and was able to predict the progenitor lineage of the upcoming flu season with near-optimal performance. The researchers suggest such a tool could be used to understand population dynamics of pathogens or malignant cells and to transform selection processes for vaccines.
A phylogenetic study of glutamate receptors (GluRs) in metazoans reveals that they have followed different evolutionary histories in separated animal lineages. The current organization of ionotropic GluRs (iGluRs) into six classes does not capture the full complexity of their evolution, instead the authors propose an updated classification of iGluRs into four subfamilies and ten classes, including four that have never been described previously, and a sister class to metabotropic GluR classes I-III, class IV. The study also identifies many unreported proteins that are expressed in the nervous system and that new Epsilon receptors form functional ligand-gated ion channels. The phylogeny of iGluR evolution across the animal kingdom shows that iGluRs present an overall organization into four subfamilies that were already present in the last ancestor of all metazoans. The metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are presently organized into three classes (I, II and III) across vertebrates, however, the exact organization of these proteins into classes is not as straightforward for non-bilaterals.
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules are involved in presenting antigenic peptides to CD8+ T cells, which helps the immune system identify infected or transformed cells. Peptides are important for the stable cell surface expression of these molecules, but under certain pathophysiological conditions, peptide-deficient or empty conformers of HLA-I molecules are also detected on the cell surface. Peptide-deficient HLA-B*35:01 tetramers preferentially bind to CD8 and enhance cognate peptide-induced cell adhesion and CD8+ T cell activation. These findings reveal a new set of regulators of CD8+ T cell activation, mediated by the binding of empty HLA-I to CD8. Peptide-deficient conformers of HLA-I molecules are also shown to bind to cell surface receptors such as KIR3DS1, KIR3DL2, KIR2DS4, and LILRB2. Peptide-deficient conformers of some allotypes such as HLA-B*35:01 are relatively more stable, and higher stability is shown to exist in the absence of peptide. Peptide-deficient conformers of HLA-B*35:01 are capable of binding to cell surface CD8 with higher potency compared to the peptide-filled version. The interaction of peptide-deficient HLA-B*35:01 with CD8 enhances cell adhesion, and these molecules are found to mediate cell adhesion. However, peptide-deficient conformers of HLA-I molecules do not directly activate CD8+ T cells
The declining coral populations due to rising temperatures and diseases make it urgent to determine the adaptive potential of foundation species, such as reef-building corals. Acropora cervicornis, a threatened Caribbean coral species, faces both rising temperatures and white-band disease stressors. The study found that susceptibility to temperature stress creates an increased risk in disease-associated mortality and only rare genets may maintain or gain infectious disease resistance under high temperature. Genetic diversity within a population is critical for species survival and persistence in a changing climate. The study also highlights the influence of different strains of the same Symbiodinium species on coral disease susceptibility and bleaching in A. cervicornis. Additionally, it examines whether stress resistance in one trait predicts stress resistance in another in A. cervicornis. Coral nurseries provided a unique opportunity to test the effect of multiple stressors on coral survival and adaptation in a common garden environment.
A new study investigates whether reduced sensitivity to bodily signals is associated with suicidal behavior. Suicide attempters display tolerance for aversive sensations and decreased awareness of non-aversive sensations, a phenomenon called 'interoceptive numbing'. Suicide attempters also exhibit prolonged breath-hold and cold-pressor challenges, lower heartbeat perception accuracy, and reduced activation of the mid/posterior insula during attention to heartbeat sensations. The findings suggest that blunted interoception may be implicated in suicidal behavior. Suicide is one of the leading causes of death worldwide, and prevention efforts have not been successful in lowering suicide rates.
This document presents a reanalysis of a stochastic model of organelle production and questions the validity of its prediction that peroxisome biogenesis is dominated by de novo production. The authors show that exact formulae for the mean and variance of the equilibrium distributions predicted by the model can be calculated in three different scenarios, removing the need for stochastic simulations or approximations. The document discusses birth and death processes and the concept of a limiting distribution in a stochastic system. Equations are presented to calculate the exact distribution of organelle numbers at equilibrium for any combination of four processes. An explicit numerical example is provided to generate a distribution using the recurrence relation. The authors find that the limiting distribution for vacuoles is a truncated Poisson distribution rather than the shifted Poisson distribution reported in the original analysis, which affects the calculation of Fano factor.
The rate of protein synthesis in the adult heart is low, but increases in response to stress and hypertrophic stimuli. Researchers have discovered a regulatory mechanism that controls the expression of cytosolic poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPC1) in cardiomyocytes, and thereby influences protein synthesis in response to developmental and hypertrophic cues. PABPC1 is post-transcriptionally silenced in adult human and mouse hearts, which results in reduced polysome association and translation of Pabpc1 transcripts. However, PABPC1 re-expression and its interaction with eIF4G promote ribosomal recruitment and translation initiation in cardiac hypertrophy. This discovery offers a plausible molecular basis for historical observations of lower protein synthetic capacity in adult striated muscle compared to other tissues.
Polyubiquitin is a protein found in cells and is made up of multiple ubiquitins. Polyubiquitins can be attached to substrate proteins through a process called ubiquitination. Different types of enzymes are involved in ubiquitination, with some dictating the specificities of substrate and ubiquitin linkage. Lys63-linked polyubiquitin is common and plays multiple regulatory roles in cells. To understand the structural basis for the recognition specificity of Lys63-linked polyubiquitin, researchers studied its conformational space using NMR data. They found that free K63-Ub2 exists as a dynamic ensemble comprising multiple closed and open quaternary states. These quaternary dynamics enable K63-Ub2 to be specifically recognized in a variety of signaling pathways. When binding to a target protein, one of the preexisting quaternary states is selected and stabilized. A point mutation that shifts the equilibrium between different states modulates the binding affinities towards K63-Ub2 ligands. This conformational selection mechanism at the quaternary level may be used by polyubiquitins of different lengths and linkages for target recognition.
The study explores the relationship between primary visual areas and higher order visual areas in the neocortex of mice. They found that genetic mechanisms specifying primary visual area size also proportionally dictate the size of surrounding higher order visual areas. The study showed that the altered primary area size resulted in similar changes in higher order area size and that functional topographic organization of the visual cortex remained intact. It is suggested that changes in primary area size may be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism.
The 3D structural organization of cis-elements and how it influences TF activity is poorly understood. In this study, a technique called lattice light-sheet imaging was used to localize and functionally probe Sox2 enhancer-organization in living embryonic stem cells. The study found that enhancers form 3D-clusters that allow rapid local fine-tuning of TF search parameters, while reducing overall efficiency of global search. The study suggests that enhancer clustering may play a key role in regulating stem cell pluripotency. This new approach could open avenues for studying single live-cell genome spatial organization and function.
Researchers have used live microscopy and statistical modeling to study the dynamics of Listeria monocytogenes as it spreads through a polarized epithelial monolayer. The study shows that Listeria monocytogenes cell-to-cell spread proceeds anisotropically in an epithelial monolayer in culture. Boundaries of infection foci are irregular and dominated by rare pioneer bacteria that spread farther than the rest. The researchers' quantitative model for bacterial spread shows that heterogeneous spreading behavior can improve the chances of creating a persistent Listeria monocytogenes infection in an actively extruding epithelium. The study indicates that Listeria monocytogenes cell-to-cell spread is heterogeneous, and that rare pioneer bacteria determine the frontier of infection foci and may promote bacterial infection persistence in dynamic epithelia.
The document discusses the establishment and role of intracellular protein gradients in spatial organization. The focus is on the reconstitution of a protein concentration gradient that directs the assembly of the cell division machinery in E. coli from the bottom-up. The study found that distinct time-averaged protein concentration gradients are established through the self-organization of oscillations of MinCDE proteins in membrane-clad soft-polymer compartments. The study provides evidence for a geometry-mediated mechanism to partition Min proteins during bacterial development, and demonstrates how FtsZ can be targeted to the middle of a cell-like compartment. The study concludes that studying gradient formation in a simplified and controlled environment should shed light on the role of individual biochemical and physical parameters for regulated protein localization in space and time.
A study has been conducted on the process of phloem unloading in Arabidopsis roots, using a combination of non-invasive imaging, 3D-electron microscopy and mathematical modelling. The study found that phloem unloading of small solutes occurs continuously via a combination of mass flow and diffusion, while large proteins are unloaded in discrete pulses via “funnel plasmodesmata”. The study also defines the dimensions of the true phloem-unloading zone in Arabidopsis roots. The authors suggest that their findings will contribute to understanding how the phloem is able to discriminate between macromolecules and solutes during unloading, a process which is crucial to regulating the movement of assimilates in plants.
KATP channels are metabolic sensors that regulate insulin secretion and are targets of antidiabetic sulfonylureas. Cryo-EM was used to study the structure of these channels and revealed a closed Kir6.2 tetrameric core with four peripheral SUR1s each anchored to a Kir6.2 by its N-terminal transmembrane domain. Intricate interactions between SUR1 and Kir6.2 suggest that SUR1 may contribute to ATP and PIP2 binding to enhance Kir6.2 sensitivity. The structure was obtained using rat insulinoma INS-1 cells and purification with glibenclamide and ATP. Mutations in the KATP channel complex can cause congenital hyperinsulinism and permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus.
The COVID-19 pandemic's impact can be difficult to compare across countries and time due to differences in testing capacity and reporting policies. Excess mortality is a more objective indicator of the pandemic's death toll, but there has been no global, regularly updated repository of all-cause mortality data across countries. To fill this gap, the World Mortality Dataset was created, which collects weekly, monthly, or quarterly all-cause mortality data from 103 countries and territories. The dataset was used to compute excess mortality in each country during the COVID-19 pandemic. The results showed that several worst-affected countries had excess mortality above 50% of the expected annual mortality or above 400 excess deaths per 100,000 population. Some countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, had mortality during the pandemic below the usual level due to social distancing measures. Additionally, some countries had been substantially underreporting their COVID-19 deaths. The dataset highlights the importance of open and rapid all-cause mortality reporting for pandemic monitoring.
This study identifies MLL4 as a major mammalian H3K4 mono- and di-methyltransferase essential for enhancer activation during cell differentiation. Using adipogenesis and myogenesis as model systems, the study found that MLL4 exhibits cell-type- and differentiation-stage-specific genomic binding and is predominantly localized on enhancers. MLL4 co-localizes with lineage-determining transcription factors (TFs) on active enhancers during differentiation. Deletion of Mll4 markedly decreases H3K4me1/2, H3K27ac, Mediator and Polymerase II levels on enhancers and leads to severe defects in cell-type-specific gene expression and cell differentiation.
The selectivity of the nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) has long been unexplained. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was used to address this issue by showing that intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) containing phenylalanyl-glycyl (FG)-rich repeats line the pore and interact with transport factors (TFs) leading to fast and specific transport. The rapid motion of FG motifs allows them to exchange on and off TFs extremely quickly through transient interactions, and because TFs uniquely carry multiple pockets for FG repeats, only they can form the frequent interactions needed for specific passage between FG repeats to cross the NPC. The entire process of transport factor docking, passage and release across the NPC takes only a few milliseconds, and the FG domains in isolation facilitate selective passage of TFs through nanopores or accumulation in hydrogels. The results of the study demonstrate that FG repeats are highly dynamic IDPs, stabilized by the cellular environment.
Human confidence in perception is not solely determined by the quality of sensory inputs, but by an integration of sensory precision and internal expectations such as arousal, according to interoceptive inference models. Researchers conducted a novel psychophysical paradigm to test this hypothesis and found that arousing disgust cues modulated the encoding of sensory noise, enabling us to regulate perceptual precision, adjusting our decisions accordingly. Unexpected changes in internal states, such as increased arousal, can influence the estimation of confidence, while unexpected arousal regulates affective salience and perceptual variability. The study confirms that confidence is a metacognitive integration of both internal and external sources of uncertainty.
The brain has an internal model of gravity that has been shown to benefit the anticipation of free falling object motion and visual perception of allocentric vertical. However, it is unknown whether and how this internal model of gravity benefits the planning and execution of skilled movement. One theory is that the internal model is used to compensate for gravity's mechanical effects on the body by maintaining invariant motor trajectories. Another theory is based on a need for effort optimization, where the internal model of gravity is used to take advantage of gravity's mechanical effects on the body for the planning and execution of voluntary movements. In order to distinguish between these two hypotheses, researchers conducted two critical experiments measuring arm kinematics while varying movement direction in normal and zero-G gravity conditions. They found that the brain uses the internal model to implement control policies that take advantage of gravity to minimize movement effort.
Recent research has shown that the reaction time (RT) may be influenced by factors other than computation time. This research demonstrates that RTs can be influenced by prior experience, causing biases in future tasks. This effect is similar to the biases observed for other movement parameters such as speed or direction. The study provides evidence that the RT is an independent parameter that can be habitually set by prior experience rather than strictly determined by computational requirements. Two experiments were conducted to demonstrate that the RT can be modulated in an experience-dependent manner. The first experiment involved a target-interception task, followed by point-to-point reaches, which showed that repeatedly generating movements at low RTs led to subsequent point-to-point reaches with reduced RTs without affecting performance. In the second experiment, participants were required to plan curved reaches around barriers in the absence or presence of cue illustrations of the path. Even though the movements required are identical in both cases, the presence of a path cue was observed to provide a significant RT advantage. This advantage is thought to reflect a difference in computational requirements between the cued and uncued conditions, with the latter requiring an additional trajectory-planning stage to represent the path shape to be executed.
Researchers have found that variations in the genetic coding sequence of the β-actin and γ-actin proteins, which are nearly identical at the amino acid level, play a key role in cell migration. The study, which used mouse embryonic fibroblasts, showed that differences in actin translation rates, in combination with mRNA localization to the cell periphery, directly influenced the dynamics of focal adhesions, impairments in actin bundle formation and reduced cell anchoring to the substrate during migration. These results reveal that nucleotide coding sequence plays an essential role in differentiating actin isoforms' function in cell migration.
The document discusses research into neuropathic pain following peripheral nerve injury, specifically focusing on the appearance and distribution of shaker-type-potassium channels (Kv1 channels) within the nodal complex of myelinated axons following injury. The study found increased expression of Kv1.4 and 1.6 within juxtaparanodes and paranodes following injury, as well as a redistribution of Kv1 channels towards the paranode at sites remote from injury. The study suggests that changes in subunit expression and redistribution of Kv1 channels act as a 'brake' on the hyperexcitable state that arises in myelinated axons following traumatic nerve injury.
The functions of kidney macrophages during development are not well understood. A new study characterizes macrophage arrival, localization, heterogeneity, and functions during kidney organogenesis. Macrophages play a role in nephron progenitor cell clearance and support vascular anastomoses in cultured kidney explants. They also promote kidney growth and have implications for the generation of bioengineered kidney tissues. Macrophages arrive near to the metanephric mesenchyme as it condenses at the caudal aspect of the Wolffian duct. They interact with blood vessels and wrap around interstitial blood vessels during later kidney development. The study shows that macrophages in the embryonic kidney restrict the early domain of nephron progenitor cells and frequently interact with blood vessels.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to reconstruct a uniquely designed 3.3 MDa macromolecular cage between two Escherichia coli proteins with seemingly incompatible symmetries - the hexameric AAA+ ATPase RavA and the decameric inducible lysine decarboxylase LdcI. A reliable pseudoatomic model of this unusual architecture was built which identified conformational rearrangements and specific elements essential for complex formation. The RavA hexamer loses its sixfold circular symmetry upon complex formation with LdcI, but the compact outward pointing hub formed by the six AAA+ modules remains virtually unchanged and the ATP binding sites preserved. The cage-like architecture of the LdcI-RavA complex has a large central cavity 3x10^6 Å3 and the entire complex possesses the dihedral fivefold symmetry of the lysine decarboxylase. The LdcI-RavA complex maintains LdcI activity even if the bacterium experiences acid stress and starvation.
RecQ helicases are proteins that contribute to maintaining the integrity of genomic DNA through their involvement in DNA recombination, replication, and repair pathways. The activity of RecQ helicases is linked to their ability to suppress illegitimate recombination and resolve recombination intermediates. The helicase and RNAseD like C-terminal domain (HRDC) of RecQ helicases plays a critical role in these activities, although the exact mechanisms are not yet understood. The authors of this paper used single-molecule magnetic tweezers and kinetic assays to investigate how the HRDC interacts with DNA to stabilize intrinsic pauses in the core helicase activity. They found that HRDC stabilizes intrinsic sequence-dependent pauses of the core helicase in a DNA geometry-dependent manner, and that this pausing may act as a homology sensing mechanism, allowing for the rapid disruption of unstable and stabilization of stable DNA strand invasions. The authors suggest that this intrinsic mechanism of recombination quality control by RecQ helicases is essential for maintaining genomic stability.
Plants store starch during the day and use it at night to maintain metabolism and growth. The rate of starch decrease during night time needs to be adjusted based on the variation in the time of darkness and the starch content to last until dawn. The control of starch degradation is critical for plant productivity. It was speculated that a mechanism measures starch content and arithmetic division is used to compute the appropriate rate of degradation. Researchers have introduced two chemical kinetic models implementing analog arithmetic division which have been tested and validated in plants perturbed by night-time light period or mutations in starch degradation pathways. The models can also generate addition, subtraction, and multiplication operations. These results are potentially relevant for any biological system dependent on a food reserve to survive for a predictable time period.
The aggregation of Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) is associated with the motor neuron disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The stability or aggregation behaviors of over 140 disease mutations of SOD1 are not correlated with the disease pathophysiology. The absence of Zn, rather than Cu, significantly affects membrane attachment of SOD1 through two loop regions facilitating aggregation driven by lipid-induced conformational changes. This model puts forward a mechanism that Zn pocket destabilization is the driving force behind the toxic gain of function of SOD1 mediated by the process of membrane association. This is achieved through computational and experimental studies, which show that Zn, but not Cu, correlates well with membrane binding energy and patient survival time after ALS diagnosis.
The microRNA miR-128 is known to be involved in the control of neurogenesis and synaptogenesis but its other potential roles have not been examined. This study shows that post-transcriptional mechanisms restrict miR-128 accumulation to post-mitotic neurons during mouse corticogenesis and in adult stem cell niches. Premature miR-128 expression in progenitors for upper layer neurons leads to impaired neuronal migration and inappropriate branching, whilst sponge-mediated inhibition results in overmigration. Within the upper layers, premature miR-128 expression reduces the complexity of dendritic arborization, associated with altered electrophysiological properties. The study identified a gene, Phf6, as an important regulatory target for miR-128 and demonstrates that restoring PHF6 expression counteracts the deleterious effects of miR-128 on neuronal migration, outgrowth, and intrinsic physiological properties.
The Dinaledi Chamber located within the Rising Star cave of South Africa contains approximately 1550 specimens and represents a small portion of the total fossil content. The chamber was always in the dark zone and not accessible to non-hominins. Preliminary evidence suggests deliberate body disposal by a hominin species other than Homo sapiens, at an unknown date. The network of cavities is developed along west-northwest, north and northwest trending fractures and joints. The Rising Star cave system is stratigraphically bound to a 15-20m thick, stromatolithic dolomite horizon in the lower parts of the Monte Christo Formation. The skeletal material recovered was collected during two field expeditions in November 2013 and March 2014, and includes 1550 identifiable fossil hominin specimens. A number of different flowstone formations can be identified in the Dinaledi Chamber. Using the distribution of flowstones, sedimentary facies, and erosional contacts, a basic stratigraphy of three separate units has been established in the Dinaledi Chamber. Mineralogical and chemical studies were carried out on sediment samples from the floors of the Dinaledi and Dragon's Back chambers to assess the nature of the sediment encasing the Dinaledi fossils and to determine whether these chambers were connected at the time of deposition of Units 2 and 3.
Researchers have conducted a study to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying male and female responses to changes in diet in fruit flies. They found that males and females have a core set of metabolic genes that are regulated in response to the composition of the diet. However, there are also smaller sets of genes with divergent and opposing regulation, particularly in reproductive genes, which are over-expressed on each sex's optimal diet. The study suggests that nutrient-sensing output from a shared metabolic machinery is reversed in males and females, leading to opposing diet-dependent regulation of reproduction in the two sexes. The researchers also linked this divergent regulation to the Tor pathway. The study provides insights into how males and females differ in their diet-dependent regulation of metabolism and reproductive allocation.
The document discusses the process of mesoderm cell migration in mouse embryo gastrulation. Live imaging was used to track the shape and movement of mesoderm cells as they delaminated from the primitive streak and formed mesoderm and definitive endoderm. The study found that mesoderm cells changed shape and extended protrusions depending on the neighboring germ layer and embryo region they were in. Transcriptomes of different mesoderm populations also uncovered specific sets of guidance, adhesion, cytoskeleton, and matrix components, which may explain the different cell behaviors between mesoderm subtypes. Embryonic mesoderm migration was found to be directional and depended on the Rho GTPases Rhoa and Rac1, while extra-embryonic mesoderm movement was GTPase independent. E6.25 is the stage when the primitive streak is formed, and mesoderm cells migrate either anteriorly as embryonic mesodermal wings or proximally as extra-embryonic mesoderm. Mesoderm migration mechanisms have mostly been studied in fly, fish, frog, and chicken embryos. However, in mice, most mutant phenotypes with mesodermal defects result from anomalies in primitive streak formation, mesoderm specification or epithelial-mesenchymal transition, precluding further insight into cell migration mechanisms.
Researchers have found that a single class of neurons in the brainstem pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC) is responsible for generating respiratory rhythm and also contributes in a premotor capacity, whereas these functions are normally attributed to separate populations of neuronal circuits. The study used photonic destruction to map and ablate the Dbx1 neurons in neonatal mice and found that its selective destruction progressively decreased respiratory frequency until rhythm ceased after ablation of ~85 neurons. The results demonstrate the quantifiable cellular parameters required to maintain network functionality and have potential ramifications for respiratory pathology in disease states.
Circular oligomerization is a common and conserved structural aspect of many C2 domain proteins, including Synaptotagmins, which act as the immediate and principal Ca2+ sensor that triggers the rapid and synchronous release of neurotransmitters following an action potential. The recent finding that Syt1 C2AB domains can form Ca2+-sensitive ring-like oligomers on phosphatidylcholine (PC)/phosphatidylserine (PS) lipid surfaces has led to investigations of the assembly and Ca2+ susceptibility of the oligomers under physiologically-relevant conditions to determine the role of the Syt1 ring in orchestrating the synchronous neurotransmitter release. Results show that analogous ring-like oligomers assemble from the C2AB domains of other Syt isoforms, as well as related C2 domain containing protein, Doc2B and extended Synaptotagmins (E-Syts). Further, electron microscopy combined with targeted mutations showed that the Syt1 ring assembly and its rapid disruption by Ca2+ involve the well-established functional surfaces on the C2B domain that are important for synaptic transmission. This suggests that ring formation may be triggered at an early step in synaptic vesicle docking and positions Syt1 to synchronize neurotransmitter release to Ca2+ influx.
COPI is a coat-like heptameric complex that coats vesicles budding from Golgi cisternae and is recruited to Golgi membranes by the small GTPase Arf1. COPI-dependent retrograde transport to the ER retrieves transmembrane ER resident proteins that occasionally escape and retrieves transmembrane ER proteins that contain cytosolically-oriented C-terminal KKxx-type signals. COPI also retrieves transmembrane ER proteins that associate with the Rer1 recycling factor and the KDEL receptor. COPI vesicles recycle resident Golgi proteins within the organelle and have been proposed to move in a directed fashion from older to younger cisternae, though no mechanism for such directed movement has emerged. The cisternal maturation model postulates that Golgi cisternae form at the cis face of the Golgi, then move through the stack to the trans face, then finally peel off to become secretory vesicles, with entire cisternae acting as forward carriers for secretory cargoes. COPI inactivation generated hybrid Golgi structures that contained both early and late Golgi proteins, became partially functional after COPI inactivation, and selectively drives the recycling of early but not of late Golgi proteins. Yeast COPI acts likely acts at the early Golgi and is dispensable for the secretion of certain proteins and for Golgi cisternal maturation. The anchor-away method was used to rapidly inactivate COPI, achieving COPI-selective recycling of Golgi proteins, and demonstrating that recycling of early Golgi proteins is dispensable for secretion.
Researchers have discovered a novel mechanism by which Rice Dwarf Virus (RDV) is able to infect rice crops. RDV triggers the production of the gaseous phytohormone ethylene by stimulating the activity of S-adenosyl-L-methionine synthetase (SAMS), a key component of the ethylene synthesis pathway, which results in higher susceptibility to RDV. The virus-encoded non-structural protein Pns11 enhances rice susceptibility to RDV by interacting with OsSAMS1, enhancing its enzymatic activity and leading to increased production of S-adenosyl-L-methionine, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, and ethylene. Conversely, OsSAMS1-knockout mutants, as well as an osein2 mutant defective in ethylene signaling, were more resistant to RDV infection. This discovery could lead to novel targets for engineered resistance to viruses in crops.
The structure of collagen is a key factor in fibrosis, a disease characterized by excessive scarring and tissue stiffness, which can lead to pulmonary fibrosis. In this study, researchers analyzed fibrotic tissue in the lungs of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and found that increased tissue stiffness was not caused by an increase in collagen concentration, but by altered collagen cross-linking. The researchers found that dual inhibition of lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL) 2 and LOXL3, two enzymes involved in collagen cross-linking, was sufficient to normalize collagen fibrillogenesis and reduce tissue stiffness in animal models of lung fibrosis. This suggests that inhibition of collagen cross-linking could be a potential therapeutic strategy for reducing the stiffness associated with fibrosis.
The molecular and cellular mechanisms that regulate gamete release in response to light stimuli are poorly understood. Hydrozoan jellyfish release gametes in response to dark-light or light-dark transitions acting on the gonad, mediated by oocyte maturation-inducing neuropeptide hormones released from the ectoderm. A candidate opsin gene called Opsin9 was identified in Clytia hemisphaerica, co-expressed with MIH within specialised ectodermal cells. Opsin9 knockout jellyfish were unable to undergo oocyte maturation and spawning. The study suggests that gamete maturation and release in Clytia are regulated by gonadal photosensory-neurosecretory cells that secrete MIH in response to light via Opsin9. Similar cells in ancestral eumetazoans may have allowed tissue-level photo-regulation of diverse behaviours.
The ON/OFF pathway split in sensory systems is a common feature that allows for more efficient coding of stimuli. While this split is thought to occur at specific synapses through a sign-inverting synapse in one of the pathways, research shows that ON selectivity is a multisynaptic process in the Drosophila visual system. Glutamatergic and GABAergic inhibition mediate ON responses, and the existence of parallel functional pathways allows for greater functional robustness. GluClα, a glutamate-gated chloride channel, mediates ON selectivity, and GABAergic inhibition plays a role in mediating ON responses downstream of the glutamatergic L1 input. PTX, a drug that inhibits glutamate-gated chloride channels, eliminates ON responses in medulla neurons, indicating the importance of this channel in mediating ON selectivity.
The hippocampus helps with episodic memory and spatial processing, and plays a crucial role in sequential neural activity for memory processing. Firing sequences of place cells in the hippocampus are replayed during awake immobility and sleep, with forward replay being observed during sleep after exploration or in immobile states before rats start to travel towards reward. Reverse replay contributes to the optimization of goal-directed paths because rewarded spatial paths are replayed around the timing of reward delivery. However, it is unclear how reverse replay selectively strengthens forward synaptic pathways. In this paper, the authors show how firing sequences bias synaptic transmissions to the opposite direction of propagation under symmetric spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) in the co-presence of short-term synaptic depression or afterdepolarization. The mechanism enables forward sequences to potentiate the synaptic transmissions responsible for reverse replay, and vice versa, and allows for goal-directed path learning through reverse sequences. The authors demonstrate this through computational modeling with a one-dimensional chain model and a two-dimensional open field.
Trophallaxis, the oral fluid exchange between social insects, has been found to contain endogenous components that could serve as a means of chemical communication between colony members. Through protein and small-molecule mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing, specific digestion- and non-digestion related proteins, hydrocarbons, microRNAs, and juvenile hormone were found in the trophallactic fluid of ant Camponotus floridanus. Analysis of trophallactic fluid proteins across different social insect species also revealed many that are regulators of growth, development, and behavioral maturation, suggesting that trophallaxis plays previously unsuspected roles in communication and enables communal control of colony phenotypes. This study provides initial evidence that the composition of this fluid is influenced by the social and/or environmental experience of an ant and supports the validity of forcing the collection of trophallactic fluid. The study also found that trophallaxis contains many small RNAs that are present in other externally secreted fluids across taxa, and it may play a role in exchanging colony odors through the presence of cuticular hydrocarbons.
The study shows that the oxidant-sensitive TRPA1 channel in cerebral artery endothelial cells is activated by hypoxia-derived reactive oxygen species, leading to cerebral artery dilation and reduced ischemic damage. The TRPA1 channels act as sensors of hypoxia and initiate an adaptive response to reduce ischemic damage in the brain. The study also suggests that TRPA1-mediated vasodilation may be a potential therapeutic target for diseases associated with impaired blood flow regulation within the brain, such as stroke and vascular cognitive impairment. The study uses a newly developed mouse model and optical patch-clamp methods to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for activation of TRPA1 channels in the intact cerebral endothelium during hypoxia and investigates the pathophysiological impact of this novel pathway in vivo using an established model of ischemic strokes. The findings suggest that TRPA1 channels in the cerebral endothelium are early sensors of hypoxia and initiate an adaptive response to reduce ischemic damage in the brain.
A study of baboons from an intensively studied wild population using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has identified substantial evidence for genetic effects on gene expression levels. Complementary expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) mapping and allele-specific expression analyses were used, and eQTL were most likely to be identified for lineage-specific, rapidly evolving genes. Interestingly, genes with eQTL significantly overlapped between baboons and a comparable human eQTL dataset, suggesting that genes vary in their tolerance of genetic perturbation and that this property may be conserved across species. The study also establishes the feasibility of eQTL mapping using RNA-seq data alone and represents an important step towards understanding the genetic architecture of gene expression in primates.
The tumor suppressor p53 is known to prevent early death due to cancer development, but its role in aging and longevity has not been fully understood. A study using a mouse model with knock-in of human TP53 gene carrying codon 72 SNP found that P72 mice with a weaker p53 activity had a longer lifespan than R72 mice, despite increased cancer risk. P72 mice also displayed delayed aging-associated phenotypes compared to R72 mice and better retained the self-renewal function of stem/progenitor cells during the aging process. The study provides direct genetic evidence that p53 codon 72 SNP impacts aging and longevity, supporting the role of p53 in regulating longevity.
Scientists have found a novel mechanism by which PAK1 inhibitors can improve social and cognitive function in animal models of brain disorders, including autism. PAK1, which is also involved in other disease processes including cancers, inflammatory conditions and allergies, was found to suppress inhibitory neurotransmission by restricting tonic endocannabinoid (eCB) signaling. The study showed that PAK1 upregulates cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), reducing anandamide (AEA) and restricting tonic eCB-mediated processes. The study observed an increased E/I ratio in PAK1 KO mice, which was due to impaired inhibitory transmission. The research provides insight into the role that PAK1 plays in brain function and the potential for PAK1 inhibitors in treating brain disorders.
The document discusses the use of pore-blocking toxins to inhibit voltage-dependent K+ channels and their crystal structure. Pore-blocking toxins are found in the venoms of poisonous animals such as scorpions, tarantula spiders and green mamba snakes. The toxins block the ion-conduction pathway of the K+ channels and alter their normal physiology. The toxin's affinity for the channel is voltage dependent, and the molecule blocks the channel by physically occluding the ion-conduction pathway. The study successfully crystallized the complex of paddle chimera with CTX, a pore-blocking toxin. The toxin-channel complex shares the same overall architecture, with the fourfold symmetry axis of the channel tetramer coinciding with the fourfold crystallographic symmetry axis. The document notes that pore-blocking toxins impact research in the K+ channel field, especially in enabling purification of specific novel K+ channels.
SNAREs are machines that facilitate membrane fusion and play a crucial role in many basic human processes. However, little is known about how SNAREs are regulated and function. To better understand these mechanisms, single-molecule optical tweezers were used to study the folding energy and kinetics of four representative SNARE complexes. It was found that all SNARE complexes have a common zippering mechanism involving slow N-terminal domain association, a pause in a force-dependent half-zippered intermediate, and fast C-terminal domain zippering. The amount of energy release from C-terminal domain zippering differs for different SNARE complexes and is concentrated at the C-terminal part of CTD zippering. Despite differences in energy release, all SNARE complexes have a conserved zippering pathway and polarized energy release to drive membrane fusion. Understanding these mechanisms could provide insights into neurological disorders and diabetes.
Researchers have discovered a way in which a green alga survives in the desert. The scientists found that Chloroidium sp. UTEX 3007, which grows in salty, sandy environments in the United Arab Emirates, has unusually large reserves of palmitate, a type of fatty acid that is stable at high temperatures. This would help the alga cope with the high temperatures found in its environment. The alga also accumulates a broad range of carbon sources which support its growth even in extreme conditions. Green algae are important for producing biomass, and are increasingly used in the food, fuel and pharmaceutical sectors, yet few have been analysed in detail.
The origin of muscle cells is a topic of interest in the study of mesoderm evolution. While much is known about the developmental mechanisms of myogenesis in vertebrates and flies, a general understanding of the process is still lacking due to the complexity and distant phylogenetic position of these systems. In order to better understand the evolutionary plasticity of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) associated with myogenesis, researchers studied the gene regulatory network of the sea urchin embryo, an early branching deuterostome. They identified a fibroblast growth factor signaling and four Forkhead transcription factors that work together to orchestrate myogenesis. They also found that the myogenic network architecture varied across different animal groups, highlighting the need for studying a larger set of model organisms. The researchers also found that FGF signaling was necessary for specifying naive non-skeletogenic mesodermal cells to myoblast precursors in early gastrula stage sea urchin embryos. These findings suggest that the logics and properties of the regulatory interactions driving myogenesis in sea urchin embryos are highly conserved among key myogenic transcriptional regulators and signaling components, but not of the myogenic GRN architecture per se.
Retinal prostheses show promise for restoring visual functions in blind patients, but still offer poor gains in visual acuity. A key challenge is improving resolution, which requires understanding its origin through appropriate animal models. Researchers developed an acute animal model to assess the functional impact of retinal prostheses compared to visual stimulation using intrinsic optical imaging of the primary visual cortex. They established a quantitative mapping of the cartographic organization of the rat visual system and found sub-retinal implants activate V1 at the appropriate position but with an extent and aspect-ratio much larger than expected due to two sources of diffusion. The researchers tested various patterns of electrical stimulation and found that reverse-engineered electrical pulses decreased the extent and aspect-ratio, offering a solution for clinical applications.
The PI3K-Akt network, which plays a crucial role in regulating cell growth and metabolism, is tightly controlled by feedback mechanisms. The overshoot in insulin-stimulated recruitment of Akt to the plasma membrane has previously been reported, which indicates the negative feedback operating on acute timescales. It is shown that Akt engages this negative feedback by phosphorylating insulin receptor substrate (IRS) 1 and 2, which results in the depletion of plasma membrane-localized IRS1/2 and reduces the pool available for interaction with the insulin receptor. Together these events limit plasma membrane-associated PI3K and phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) synthesis. The study establishes a novel mechanism by which the kinase Akt acutely controls PIP3 abundance, through post-translational modification of the IRS scaffold.
The process of membrane fusion in intracellular vesicular traffic is regulated by SNARE proteins and cofactors such as Sec17/α-SNAP, Sec18/NSF, and Sec1/Munc18 (SM) proteins. SM proteins have been found to not only accelerate fusion, but to also shield SNARE complexes from Sec17- and Sec18-mediated disassembly. They also directly interact with assembling pre-fusion trans-SNARE complexes to protect them from premature disassembly. The authors used genetic manipulations in vivo and in vitro assays to establish that SM proteins directly impair Sec18-mediated SNARE disassembly. They found that full, wild-type function of SM proteins Sly1 and Vps33 was required to buffer cells against perturbations of the SNARE disassembly machinery.
The document discusses a study of the variation of rhythmic behaviors across individuals in a bilaterally symmetric leech heartbeat system. The study investigates the sources of output variability across the motor system from the central pattern generator (CPG) to the motor plant. The system consists of two coordinations in the bilateral hearts with different intersegmental phase relations and periodic side-to-side switches. The study shows that while the system is precise within a coordination, differences in repeating a coordination contributed little to population output variability. However, genetic and life history differences among individuals may contribute to much output variability. The study also shows that variability across individuals and across cell types in underlying intrinsic and synaptic properties is a hallmark of neuronal networks, even those that produce stereotyped output. The study focuses on the sources of variability, including inherent variability due to the stochastic nature of biological processes, repetition variability, variability within an individual due to differences between bilaterally homologous cells, and population variability due to genetic and experiential differences. The study found that cycle-to-cycle variabilities in phase were low at all levels, in both coordination states, and on both sides, indicating that activity within an individual is precise. The study also quantified the large variability in phase across individuals at each level and showed that high variability at one level is not necessarily fed forward to the next. The study concludes that each animal arrives at a unique solution to producing a functional heartbeat motor pattern based on phase differences in the premotor pattern and synaptic strength patterns from the CPG to motor neurons.
The study discusses Project Rephetio, which aims to computationally predict whether a compound can treat a disease, leading to improved efficiency and cost-effectiveness of drug approval. The project constructs Hetionet, an integrative network encoding knowledge from millions of biomedical studies, consisting of 47,031 nodes of 11 types and 2,250,197 relationships of 24 types. Hetionet is used to identify network patterns that distinguish treatments from non-treatments and predict the probability of treatment for compound-disease pairs. The study validates its predictions on two external sets of treatment and provides pharmacological insights on epilepsy, helping prioritize drug repurposing candidates. The article argues that integrating biological knowledge to prioritize drug repurposing will help overcome limited EHR sample size and data quality. It also discusses the methodology used to develop Hetionet v1.0 and provides a public Neo4j instance to query and visualize the network, which is available for download in JSON, Neo4j, and TSV formats. Finally, the study evaluates how drugs exert their therapeutic potential, identifying types of paths that occur frequently between treatments and non-treatments, and assessing their performance through ΔAUROC.
Lamotrigine, a widely available anticonvulsant drug, has been identified as a tool to study bacterial ribosome biogenesis. Using a diverse chemical collection, lamotrigine was identified as a compound that induced cold-sensitive growth inhibition in Escherichia coli, causing the accumulation of immature ribosomal subunits. The study demonstrates the potential of small molecule inhibitors as probes for studying complex biological processes, such as ribosome assembly, and highlights the role of translation initiation factor IF2 in this process.
The study shows that a CAPERα/TBX3 repressor complex is required to prevent premature senescence of primary cells and regulates the activity of core senescence pathways in mouse embryos. Associations between TBX3 (human) and Tbx3 (mouse) with RNA-binding and splicing factors were analyzed, revealing that endogenous Caperα in e10.5 mouse embryos binds Tbx3. Knockdown of either protein resulted in a dramatic increase in senescence-associated β-galatosidase activity. The study also found that UCA1, a lncRNA, is a direct target of CAPERα/TBX3 repression, and that its overexpression induces senescence. The dual, reinforcing mechanisms of CAPERα/TBX3 and UCA1 are positioned upstream of multiple members of the p16/RB pathway in the regulatory hierarchy that controls cell proliferation and senescence.
The document describes a process called alternative transposition, which produces novel structures called Composite Insertions (CIs) that contain transposable elements (TEs) and segmental duplications of variable lengths. The process involves re-replication of TEs and their flanking sequences during S phase, generating double-strand breaks that are repaired to create TDDCI alleles. The study used maize as a model organism and showed how alternative transposition coupled with DNA replication can significantly alter genome structure and contribute to rapid genome evolution. The document also describes DNA replication control and the consequences of misregulation, which can lead to DNA re-replication, genome instability, major chromosomal rearrangements, and tumorigenesis.
The heat shock response is an important pathway for maintaining protein homeostasis in cells under thermal or other environmental stresses. The heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) is the master transcriptional regulator of this pathway in eukaryotes, and its activation is regulated by chaperone titration and phosphorylation. However, the mechanisms that directly control Hsf1 activity remain unclear. In this study, the authors showed that in budding yeast, Hsf1 associates with the chaperone Hsp70 and this association is transiently disrupted by heat shock, providing the first evidence that a chaperone repressor directly regulates Hsf1 activity. Using a mathematical model, the authors found that Hsf1 activation by heat shock is based on a switch in which unfolded proteins compete with Hsf1 for binding to Hsp70. The authors also found that Hsf1 phosphorylation is not required for activation but rather positively tunes Hsf1 by enhancing the transcriptional output levels as a 'positive gain'. Together, these findings provide insights into the uncoupled forms of regulation of Hsf1 that allow it to flexibly integrate signals from the proteostasis network and cell signaling pathways.
Researchers have developed a brain network model that integrates structural and functional data with neural population dynamics to predict individual resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time series and spatial network topologies. The model is driven by electroencephalography (EEG) source activity, making it more biologically realistic as EEG approximates excitatory synaptic input currents. The hybrid model predicts several empirical phenomena such as resting-state fMRI oscillations and functional connectivity networks, excitation-inhibition balance, inverse relationships between α-rhythms, spike-firing, and fMRI on short and long time scales, and fMRI power-law scaling. The model also reveals the precise neurophysiological mechanisms underlying these phenomena, including how the network interaction of neural populations leads to the emergence of these phenomena across multiple temporal scales. The biophysically grounded brain model can test mechanistic hypotheses about scale-free dynamics, excitation-inhibition balance, and the haemodynamic correlates of α-activity.
Researchers have successfully identified the myristoylated proteome of Toxoplasma gondii, a parasitic organism that causes the disease toxoplasmosis, using chemoproteomic methods. Myristoylation is a co-translational modification of proteins that plays a crucial role in the initial steps of invasion, likely during the interaction with and penetration of the host cell. The study also identified a small-molecule N-myristoyl transferase (NMT) inhibitor developed against related Plasmodium spp. which was found to be functional in Toxoplasma. The findings expand the understanding of myristoylation in Toxoplasma beyond priming for palmitoylation and stable membrane attachment. The approach could also be used to identify myristoylated proteins in other organisms, potentially leading to the development of new drug targets.
Bats can host virulent zoonotic viruses, such as rabies, without experiencing disease due to their unique immune systems, including constitutively expressed IFN-α. To understand the impact of bat immune systems on viral dynamics, the authors conducted virus infectivity assays on bat cell lines expressing induced and constitutive immune phenotypes and developed a theoretical model fitting empirical data. Findings show that robust antiviral defenses correlated with higher estimates for within-host viral propagation rates. However, viruses that have evolved with bat immune systems may cause enhanced virulence in secondary hosts with divergent immune systems. The authors suggest that models of viral dynamics may be useful in understanding zoonotic emergence.
The coordination of movement across the body is a poorly understood aspect of motor control. Mutant mice with cerebellar circuit defects exhibit characteristic impairments in locomotor coordination, but the fundamental features of this gait ataxia have not been effectively isolated. Researchers describe a novel system for analyzing limb, head, and tail kinematics of freely walking mice which reveals that 3D trajectories and inter-limb and whole-body coordination are specifically impaired in mice with visibly ataxic Purkinje cell degeneration. The prominent nose and tail oscillations observed in these mice were successfully modeled as passive consequences of the forward motion of the hind limbs, suggesting the absence of a mechanism that normally predicts and compensates for movements of other parts of the body. These results suggest a specific failure to predict the consequences of movement across joints, limbs, and body and are consistent with the hypothesis that the cerebellum provides a forward model for motor control.
A new autochthonous transgenic mouse model has been generated in which conditional expression of MYC and Twist1 enables hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) to metastasize in over 90% of mice. Both MYC and Twist1 cooperate and their sustained expression is required to elicit a transcriptional program associated with the activation of innate immunity, through secretion of a cytokinome that elicits recruitment and polarization of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). MYC and Twist1 drive metastasis of HCC by a macrophage-dependent mechanism, and cytokines secreted by cancer cells mediate MYC and Twist1 driven macrophage recruitment and polarization. In addition, in 33 human cancers, MYC, and TWIST1 predict poor survival, CCL2/IL13 expression and TAM infiltration, while in the plasma of patients with HCC, CCL2 and IL13 were increased, and IL13 predicted invasive tumors. The new model provides a tractable approach for studying specific mechanisms of metastasis, particularly the role of the immune microenvironment.
Plants produce different specialized metabolites, including 17-Hydroxygeranylinalool diterpene glycosides (DTGs), which function primarily in defense mechanisms. DTGs are malonylated to confer structural diversity, stability, and solubility, which helps detoxify xenobiotics. However, little is known about the primary roles of specialized metabolism in plant growth and development. This study found that DTG malonylation plays a central role in controlling the development of specific plant parts, such as floral styles, by regulating the biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA). Malonylation is mediated by malonyltransferases, and silencing the NaMaT1 gene, involved in DTG malonylation, leads to reduced stylar cell and IAA contents, resulting in reduced floral style lengths. Disturbing DTG malonylation patterns results in the Nicotiana genus-specific jasmonate-regulated phenotype that affects plant style development via auxin signaling. DTGs were found to be uniformly malonylated across development, treatments, and tissue types, and NaMaT1 was identified as the gene involved in malonylation. Purified recombinant enzyme activity showed that NaMaT1, NaMaT2, and NaMaT3, among the five putative N. attenuata malonyltransferase (MaT) genes, can catalyze malonylation from Lyciumoside IV to Nicotianoside I, with NaMaT1 strongly induced in response to Manduca sexta feeding. Silencing of all three candidate MaTs reduced NaMaT1 transcript abundance, affecting floral development.
Researchers have discovered a unique relationship between a specific species of green algae and a type of salamander that benefits both. Oophila amblystomatis, an algae species, enters cells of the Ambystoma maculatum salamander during embryonic development to form an endosymbiosis. The algae undergoes significant metabolic changes, including a shift from oxidative metabolism to fermentation, when it enters the cells of the host. Culturing experiments revealed that host glutamine may serve as a primary source of nitrogen for the algal symbiont. Transcriptional changes in salamander cells indicate an innate immune response to the algae, but the host cells did not demonstrate significant signs of stress. Unlike other endosymbioses involving microbial cells that live within vertebrate cells, the O. amblystomatis and A. maculatum symbiosis consistently benefits the hosts.
The production of healthy gametes in meiosis relies on the quality control and proper distribution of both nuclear and cytoplasmic contents. This process involves the elimination of age-induced cellular damage through a previously unknown mechanism. A new study using time-lapse fluorescence microscopy in budding yeast has uncovered a new mechanism of nuclear quality control and provided insight into its function in cellular rejuvenation. The study found that nuclear senescence factors are sequestered away from chromosomes during meiosis II, a similar process to the core subunits of the nuclear pore complex, and subsequently eliminated. The sequestered material is contained in a membranous compartment formed through nuclear envelope remodeling. De novo generation of plasma membrane is required for the sequestration event to prevent the inheritance of long-lived nucleoporins and senescence factors into the newly formed gametes. The study also found that age-associated protein aggregates, extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA circles, and nucleolar damage all undergo programmed sequestration and destruction during meiotic differentiation.
Researchers have identified a conserved motif in plant immune receptors called NLRs, which are responsible for triggering programmed cell death in response to pathogen invasions. This motif, called the MADA motif, is present in the N-terminal region of NRC family proteins and around 20% of coiled-coil type plant NLRs. The motif is similar to the N-terminal α1 helix of Arabidopsis NLR protein ZAR1, which undergoes a conformational switch during resistosome activation. The study used in vitro Mu transposition to generate a random truncation library and identify the minimal functional region of NLRs, focusing on NRC4. The researchers found that the NRC4 N-terminal 29 amino acids induce hypersensitive cell death and are defined by the MADA motif. The study also found that NRC-dependent sensor NLRs lack MADA sequences, indicating that this motif has degenerated over evolutionary time.
A study developed and validated a mobile software application, or app, for the prediction of viral-only causes of acute diarrhea in children in low- and middle-income countries. The app used patient-specific clinical variables and location-specific viral diarrhea seasonality curves to accurately identify children with a high likelihood of viral-only diarrhea etiology, reducing inappropriate antibiotic use. Funding for the study was provided by grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. The study highlights the need for cost-effective tools to determine diarrhea etiology at the point-of-care without relying on laboratory tests, especially in LMICs where the burden of pediatric diarrhea is the greatest.
The document discusses the use of polygenic risk scores (PRS) derived from large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to evaluate genetic liability for complex diseases. The authors analyzed 162 PRS and 551 traits from the UK Biobank study and developed a web application to visualize their findings. They used phenome-wide association studies to investigate PRS and demonstrated the utility of PRS in predicting disease and evaluating putative causal relationships. The authors propose using sensitivity analyses developed in the field of Mendelian randomization (MR) to ensure that PRS associations represent causal relationships. The document also lists several findings from the study, including associations between PRS and university degrees, taking medication, and developing ulcerative colitis. Finally, the document investigates the strongest associations detected between the schizophrenia PRS and all 551 complex traits analyzed in the UK Biobank study, using MR to investigate the effect of PRS traits on outcomes.
The study reveals that calcium ion channels, CaV1.2, in heart muscle cells control the coordinated contractions of the heart by acting like a cluster. Researchers discovered that the ion channels form clusters that undergo dynamic, reciprocal, allosteric interactions, increases the influx of calcium into heart muscle cells.

The interactions are initiated by incoming calcium ion binding to calmodulin (CaM) and proceed through Ca2+/CaM binding to the CaV1.2 pre-IQ domain. Coupling fades as [Ca2+]i decreases, but persists longer than the current that evoked it, providing evidence for 'molecular memory.'

The study suggests a model for CaV1.2 channel gating and Ca2+-influx amplification that unifies diverse observations about calcium signaling in the heart and challenges the long-held view that voltage-gated channels open and close independently. The results may help develop new therapies for arrhythmia and heart failure.
A single early-life course of antibiotics in male NOD mice accelerated and enhanced the development of type 1 diabetes (T1D). The antibiotic course had persistent effects on the microbiome and altered cecal, hepatic, and serum metabolites. The effects were sex-specific and altered innate and adaptive immunity. The altered microbiota potentially protected against or accelerated T1D onset. The enhanced T1D development depended on the antibiotics used. The perturbed microbiota plays an initiating role in altering normal maturational patterns of innate and adaptive immunity in T1D pathogenesis. There is a marked asymmetry in the pathways in both males and females. The representation of some pathways correlated closely with others. The metagenome analysis could identify biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) encoding differential secondary metabolites.
The Lesedi Chamber, a second chamber separated from the Dinaledi Chamber within the Rising Star cave system in South Africa, has potentially identified a minimum of three individuals attributed to Homo naledi. The skeletal remains comprise 131 specimens including both adult and immature material. The most significant specimen is the near-complete cranium of a large individual, designated as LES1. The Lesedi Chamber skeletal sample extends our knowledge of the morphology and variation of Homo naledi. The chamber itself has been named the Lesedi Chamber and is in the central sector of the Rising Star system. The stratigraphy is complex and it is uncertain how much of the hominin assemblage may remain in its primary depositional context. Hominin postcranial remains from locality 102a include 61 identified specimens that represent a minimum of 31 postcranial elements, not counting ribs, and every anatomical region of the skeleton is represented with the notable exceptions of tibia, fibula and pedal remains.
The study aims to answer the question of when and how the transition between diderm and monoderm cell envelopes occurred in bacteria. Negativicutes and Halanaerobiales, who belong to the classically monoderm Firmicutes, possess outer membranes with lipopolysaccharide (LPS-OM). The study proposes that LPS-OMs of the Negativicutes and Halanaerobiales are remnants of ancient diderm cell envelopes that were present in the ancestor of the Firmicutes. The results provide support that the emergence of monoderm Firmicutes came from diderm ancestors via multiple independent losses of the OM. Additionally, a transmission electron microscopy image of one representative of Negativicutes and one of Halanaerobiales confirmed the presence of clearly diderm-type cell envelope architecture in both strains.
The article discusses the phenomenon of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) in Acinetobacter baumannii, a pathogenic bacterium that causes infections resistant to various antibiotics, including polymyxin B (PMB), a last-resort treatment. The study shows that PMB-resistant variants of A. baumannii produce more OMVs, which protect both the producer and the entire bacterial community from PMB treatment. The upregulation of the pmr operon and decreased membrane-linkage proteins are linked to overproduction of OMVs, which also promote enhanced biofilm formation. The study concludes that OMVs function as decoys against PMB, highlighting the potential danger of OMVs in reducing the effectiveness of antibiotics and other bactericidal agents and posing a serious threat to the treatment of bacterial infections.
A new Bayesian statistical model has been developed to investigate genomic imprinting in the cerebellum of mammals. The study identified 160 imprinted transcripts, including 41 novel, independently validated imprinted genes. The results show that genes exhibit parentally biased expression, with different magnitudes according to age, organ, and brain region. Furthermore, developmental changes in parental bias and overall gene expression are strongly correlated, suggesting combined roles in regulating gene dosage. Brain-specific deletion of the paternal, but not maternal, allele of the paternally-biased Bcl-x results in loss of specific neuron types, supporting the functional significance of parental biases. These findings reveal the remarkable complexity of genomic imprinting, with important implications for understanding the normal and diseased brain.
Researchers have proposed a new approach to cancer therapy by manipulating tumour cell identity to suppress their progression. In a study using the Caenorhabditis elegans germline tumour model, inducing ER stress was found to suppress the lethal germline tumour by activating the ER stress sensor IRE-1. Furthermore, the tumorous germ cells underwent transdifferentiation into ectopic somatic cells, which restored their ability to execute apoptosis (programmed cell death) and allowed subsequent removal from the gonad. These findings suggest tumour cell transdifferentiation as a potential method to combat cancer and overcome the loss of apoptosis sensitivity in tumours.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from perivascular stem cells (PSCs) have been found to mediate bone repair by stimulating skeletal cell proliferation, migration, and osteodifferentiation through paracrine mechanisms. PSC-EVs were observed to share mitogenic, pro-migratory, and pro-osteogenic properties of their parent cell, and these effects were dependent on CD9/CD81 binding partners in recipient cells. PSC-EVs also demonstrated similar effects on different types of recipient multipotent mesenchymal cells. PSC-EVs elaborated in culture retain bioactive effects of their parent perivascular cell type, making them an “off-the-shelf” alternative for bone tissue regeneration. PSC-EVs exerted pleiotropic effects on skeletal progenitor cells, including mitogenic, pro-migratory, and pro-osteogenic effects, and broad-ranging changes in the cellular transcriptome of the recipient cell. The cellular effects of PSC-EVs on skeletal progenitor cells converge to incite intramembranous bone repair in a mouse model.
Spontaneous bursts of electrical activity in developing sensory pathways are critical for survival, maturation and circuit refinement. In the auditory system, intrinsically generated activity arises within the cochlea, but the molecular mechanisms that initiate this activity remain poorly understood. This study shows that burst firing of mouse inner hair cells prior to hearing onset requires P2RY1 autoreceptors expressed by inner supporting cells. P2RY1 activation triggers K+ efflux and depolarization of hair cells, as well as osmotic shrinkage of supporting cells that dramatically increased the extracellular space and speed of K+ redistribution. The precise patterning of this electrical activity appears crucial for refinement of local connections. The mechanisms responsible for initiating spontaneous activity appear to be unique to each sensory system. To directly assess the relationship between P2RY1 activity and extracellular K+ accumulation near IHCs, K+ levels in the extracellular space using IHC K+ channels were monitored. Focal P2RY1 stimulation with a selective agonist, which mimics the effect of endogenous ATP by eliciting an inward current and crenations in ISCs in control but not P2ry1 KO mice.
A study reports the discovery of well-preserved three-dimensional anatomy in mineralized arthropod fossils from Paleogene fissure fillings. The new anatomical data led to a refinement of the species diagnosis and demonstrate the value of mineralized fossils as a rich but largely unexplored source of anatomical data for fossil arthropods. The study also describes the remarkable preservation of an Onthophilus intermedius hister beetle fossil, enabling comparisons with an extant ethanol-fixed specimen and facilitating an extended species description according to modern taxonomic standards. Finally, the study rejects a previous hypothesis of close phylogenetic relationship between O. intermedius and an extant congeneric species.
The antibiotic salinamide A (Sal) inhibits bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP) through a novel binding site and mechanism. Sal inhibits RNA synthesis in cells, and mutations that confer Sal-resistance map to RNAP genes. The crystal structure of RNAP and Sal interaction is shown and the results provide a target for antibacterial drug discovery. Sal targets the "bridge-helix N-terminal hinge," "F-loop" and "link region" of RNAP, and inhibits nucleotide addition in transcription initiation and elongation. The Sal target does not overlap the targets of previously characterized RNAP inhibitors Rif, Stl, CBR703, Myx, and Lpm.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder that causes respiratory distress in neonates. The Necdin-deficient mouse model reproduces the respiratory phenotype of PWS. Necdin deletion in these mice disturbs the migration of serotonin neuronal precursors, leading to altered neuroarchitecture and increased spontaneous firing of serotonin neurons. The study shows that increased activity of serotonin transporter (SERT) is a key mediator of central apnea in the model and inhibiting SERT restores normal breathing in Necdin-KO mice. The findings suggest that abnormalities in 5-HT metabolism and release may mediate respiratory dysfunction in PWS. Overall, the study demonstrates a causal link between the perturbed development of the 5-HT system and respiratory complications in PWS.
The document discusses the relationship between aversive learning, dopamine neuron activity, and ketamine treatment in mice. A single dose of ketamine can restore escape behavior after aversive learning. Dopaminergic neuron activity in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) varies across learning, and ketamine's effects are blocked by chemogenetic inhibition of dopamine signaling. Ketamine appears to rescue dopamine dynamics through actions in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). VTA DA neuron activity is restructured by learned helplessness (LH), which is rescued following ketamine treatment.
A group of scientists has introduced a new and simple approach to predicting the binding affinity of proteins based on their interfacial contacts. The researchers introduced a network of interfacial contacts, which they claim is so far the best structural property for describing binding strength. They then used this to predict binding affinity based on functional and structural features of the biological system. The new model has been tested against a protein-protein binding affinity benchmark and was outperformed only by exact, computationally-expensive methods. They discovered that experimental methods for measuring affinity have an impact on the prediction accuracy, and determined that the distance between amino acids on the surface of proteins was a crucial factor. The study notes that understanding protein-protein interactions is important for the development of therapeutics and the the fight against disease.
Researchers have gained a better understanding of how the subunits in Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), an enzyme that is essential for learning, memory and cardiac function, are exchanged. The study shows the human CaMKII exists in both dodecameric and tetradecameric forms, and the calmodulin-binding element of CaMKII destabilises the enzyme to release dimers. A three-way competition also emerged for the binding element, colloquially known as a wedge, between the kinase domain, Ca2+/CaM and the hub of the holoenzyme. These findings help clarify the molecular mechanisms of activation-triggered subunit exchange in CaMKII.
The article discusses a study on the relationship between happiness and learning in decision-making. The researchers found that momentary happiness is associated with the difference between experienced and predicted rewards, which is a key component of adaptive behavior. They also found that how we learn about our world may be more important for how we feel than the rewards we actually receive. The study tested subjects in a reinforcement learning task and found that happiness is like behavior and is sensitive to learning-relevant variables but not learning-irrelevant variables. The study also found that depressive symptoms reduce happiness more in volatile than stable environments. The research provides insight into the relationship between mood and adaptive behavior in decision-making tasks.
A new framework for identifying important climate regions worldwide has been developed using a network-based approach to account for the distribution of animals beyond just vegetation. The framework uses realized niches of 26,000 species of tetrapods to identify climate regions, showing that high-energy climates, such as deserts and tropical savannas, are consistent across all groups, while temperate climates differ across all groups. The study calls for caution when using general climate classifications to study specific taxa and identifies the climates shaping the distribution of tetrapods globally.
Plants respond to herbivore attack by increasing resistance and decreasing growth, regulated by phytohormonal signalling networks. A study has identified WRKY70, a specific herbivore-induced rice transcription factor that prioritises defence over growth by positively regulating jasmonic acid (JA) and negatively regulating gibberellin (GA) biosynthesis when attacked by Chilo suppressalis, a type of chewing herbivore. WRKY70-dependent JA biosynthesis is required for proteinase inhibitor activation and resistance against C. suppressalis. In contrast, WRKY70 induction increases plant susceptibility against Nilaparvata lugens, the rice brown planthopper. WRKY70-dependent GA signalling was identified as the causal factor in N. lugens susceptibility. The study shows that prioritising defence over growth leads to a significant resistance trade-off with important implications for the evolution and agricultural exploitation of plant immunity.
Pentameric ligand-gated ion channels (pLGICs) mediate signaling between cells and are targeted by various therapeutic substances. Despite the existence of high-resolution structures, their dynamics remain poorly understood. Researchers used proton-gated channel GLIC and fluorescent reporters to study its dynamics. They found that proton application causes a global compaction of the extracellular subunit and an outward motion of M2-M3 loop near the channel gate. These movements happen in lipid vesicles and detergent micelles, without channel opening at low proton concentration, and are complete within 2ms. The labeling of receptors was done with the small and pH-insensitive fluorescent reporter Bunte salt (BBs) to monitor short-range inter-residue pH-elicited motions between tryptophan/tyrosine and bimane.
The Warburg Effect, which is the increased metabolism of glucose to lactate, is characteristic of aerobic glycolysis. The biochemical changes associated with this phenotype are not fully understood, so a computational model was developed using metabolic control analysis, metabolomics data, and statistical simulations to identify and confirm a novel mode of regulation specific to aerobic glycolysis. This mode of regulation involves flux through GAPDH, the enzyme separating lower and upper glycolysis, and the levels of fructose (1,6) bisphosphate (FBP), which are used to predict the rate and control points in glycolysis. The findings provide further understanding of the determinants of the Warburg Effect and suggest potential strategies for treating it.
Pancreatic cancer has a high mortality rate due to metastasis, and while mutated KRAS is present in most patients, controlling it or its downstream effectors clinically has not worked. However, a small G protein called ARL4C, induced by the Wnt and EGF–RAS pathways, is frequently overexpressed in pancreatic cancer patients and required for cancer cell invasion. IQGAP1 was also found to be a novel interacting protein for ARL4C, which recruited IQGAP1 and its downstream effector, MMP14, to invasive pseudopods, the active site of invasion, inducing degradation of the extracellular matrix. High expression of ARL4C is correlated with the aggressiveness and poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer. Although ARL4C is expressed in early stages of PDAC, it activates different downstream pathways in a cancer cell context-dependent manner. ARL4C is involved in degradation of the ECM through its localization to the tips of invasive pseudopods and plays an important role in the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells.
Varenicline, the most effective of the currently-approved smoking cessation treatments, has been examined to better understand the actions of the drug during long-term nicotine exposure. Results show that it reduces nicotine upregulation of α4β2-type nicotinic receptors in live cells and neurons, but not for membrane preparations. Effects on upregulation depend on intracellular pH homeostasis and were not observed if acidic pH in intracellular compartments was neutralized. Varenicline was trapped as a weak base in acidic compartments and slowly released, blocking 125I-epibatidine binding, and desensitizing α4β2Rs. Epibatidine itself was trapped and 125I-epibatidine slow release from acidic vesicles was directly measured and required the presence of α4β2Rs. Nicotine exposure increased epibatidine trapping by increasing the numbers of acidic vesicles containing α4β2Rs. The study provides a new paradigm for how smoking cessation occurs and suggests how more effective smoking cessation agents can be designed.
Dietary magnesium supplementation has been shown to improve memory in rodents, and this study demonstrates that it also enhances long-term memory in fruit flies. The enhancement appears to depend on the expression of the uex gene, which encodes a Mg2+-efflux transporter, and does not require NMDA receptors. Mg2+ homeostasis is critical for normal brain function, and alterations in Mg2+ levels have been linked to a range of clinical conditions. The study suggests that dietary magnesium may have therapeutic value for memory-related problems.
Insulin signaling in motor neurons of fruit flies affects the release of neurotransmitters by altering the synaptic vesicle fusion machinery, according to a study in eLife. The research also found that increased levels of protein in the diet reduced the likelihood of release of vesicles.

The document discusses the role of H3K9 methylation in establishing and maintaining transcriptionally silent epigenetic states, also known as heterochromatin. It is widely believed that enzymes responsible for erasing histone modifications are the primary mechanism for reversing epigenetic silencing. However, a putative histone demethylase called Epe1 in fission yeast has been found to have a non-enzymatic function that opposes heterochromatin assembly. The C-terminus of Epe1 interacts with Swi6HP1, and H3K9 methylation stimulates this protein-protein interaction, which disrupts heterochromatin by outcompeting the histone deacetylase Clr3. The document also discusses the various models explaining how Epe1 regulates heterochromatin and how Alanine substitutions of amino acid residues involved in Fe (II) or α-ketoglutarate binding can disrupt co-factor binding, resulting in the concomitant loss of Epe1 activity. 
Researchers have described the fractionation, expansion and conversion of primary adult human pancreatic ductal cells into progeny resembling native beta cells. Through genetic reprogramming, expandable human pancreatic cells with defined factors may serve as a general strategy for islet replacement in diabetes. The researchers report that normal human adult pancreatic duct cells can be sorted, clonally expanded, and genetically converted into endocrine cells. Insulin-producing cells that were produced from sorted duct cells exhibited hallmark features of functional neonatal beta cells including high-level preproinsulin (INS) expression, proinsulin processing and dense-core granule formation. The findings reveal a new system for investigating human pancreatic duct cell biology, genetics, and beta-cell regeneration.
Researchers have discovered a new population of excitatory interneurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn and trigeminal nucleus caudalis that express calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). These interneurons are under tonic inhibitory control under resting conditions but become hyperexcitable under certain conditions. The CGRP interneurons receive input from large myelinated afferents and contribute to deep dorsal horn nociresponsive circuits. While they do not have long-distance axonal projections, they do receive significant synaptic input from primary afferents. The CGRP interneurons are heterogeneous and overlap with a subset of the Cck-negative RORα population of lamina III interneurons. Despite their role in nociceptive circuits, innocuous mechanical stimuli under baseline conditions does not activate these interneurons. Further research is needed to understand the potential implications of these findings in the treatment of pain.
A study published in the journal eLife revealed that humans treat filled-in inferred percepts as more real than veridical ones. Researchers utilized the phenomenon of filling-in to compare partially inferred and veridical percepts. In the study, subjects were asked to choose between stimuli that elicited filling-in, and perceptually equivalent ones presented outside the blind-spots, looking for a Gabor stimulus without a small orthogonal inset. The researchers found that in ambiguous conditions, when the stimuli were physically identical and the inset was absent in both, subjects often preferred the blind-spot stimulus even though it had no relevant veridical information available. The researchers found that humans perceive filled-in inferred percepts as more reliable than veridical ones, suggesting an adaptive decision-making strategy.
Liver progenitor cells differentiate into both hepatocytes and biliary cells, with TGFβ and Notch signalling playing key roles. However, recent studies have suggested that liver progenitors are also influenced by mechanical cues in their microenvironment. To investigate this, researchers created microarrayed patterns to study the differentiation of mouse liver progenitor cells. In these patterns, biliary differentiation was observed at the periphery and hepatocytic differentiation at the centre; parallel measurements using microscopic force sensors showed substantial stress at the periphery, coincident with maximal biliary differentiation. The team investigated the impact of downstream signalling and found that peripheral biliary differentiation depends not only on Notch and TGFβ but also on E-cadherin, myosin-mediated cell contractility, and ERK. The team identified distinct combinations of mechanical signalling and biochemical cues responsible for the differentiation of liver progenitors into both hepatocyte and biliary fates.
Researchers have used next-generation sequencing to analyze 43 isolates from 11 oral candidiasis patients to study the evolution of drug resistance and host adaptation in Candida albicans. They found newly selected mutations, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) events, which were commonly associated with acquired resistance. The research also shows that isolates varied in adherence, filamentation, and virulence. The work reveals new molecular mechanisms underlying the evolution of drug resistance and host adaptation. Candida albicans is both a member of the healthy human microbiome and a major pathogen in immunocompromised individuals, and in some individuals, it becomes a serious, life-threatening pathogen.
The study looks at the factors that can influence the transmission of emerging viruses, focusing on the respiratory viral loads (rVLs) of SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and influenza A (H1N1)pdm09. The analysis finds that heterogeneity in rVL is an intrinsic virological factor that facilitates greater overdispersion for SARS-CoV-2 in the COVID-19 pandemic than A (H1N1)pdm09 in the 2009 influenza pandemic. The study also notes that many COVID-19 cases present minimal transmission risk, while highly infectious individuals shed tens to thousands of SARS-CoV-2 virions/min via droplets and aerosols. Intrinsic case variation in rVL facilitates overdispersion in the transmissibility of emerging respiratory viruses. The study has implications for disease control in the COVID-19 pandemic as well as future outbreaks of novel viruses.
The self-assembly of the ESCRT-III complex is an important step in cellular processes, but the mechanisms by which the subunits recognize and interact with each other to form flexible architectures is not fully understood. A new study shows that the Snf7 subunit uses electrostatic interactions through a conserved acidic helix to recruit its partner Vps24, and that charge-inversion mutations in this helix inhibit lateral interactions in the polymer. The study proposes a model in which these electrostatic interactions can enable inter-subunit recognition and polymer flexibility in membrane-remodeling heteropolymeric assemblies. ESCRT-III is involved in a range of cellular processes, and the study sheds light on how the subunits assemble to carry out their functions.
Researchers have established a human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived myogenic model to investigate the therapeutic effect of metabolites of the pentose phosphate pathway in Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS). The model recapitulates the major skeletal muscle hallmarks of WWS and highlights the significance of FKRP residual enzymatic capacity. The findings suggest the potential of ribose/ribitol in combination with NAD+ to treat WWS and other diseases associated with FKRP mutations. However, rescue by PPP metabolites varies significantly among samples with different mutations, and other metabolites may potentiate the recovery of functional glycosylation of α-dystroglycan.
The study focuses on understanding the mechanism of membrane fusion, specifically in the context of vacuoles (lysosomes) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The study found that the SNAREs alone were not efficient in mediating all the stages of the fusion process and a tethering step was required to promote rapid fusion, which could be achieved through the Ypt7p-HOPS tethering complex or vacuole-specific tethering mechanism mediated by the interaction of Vam7p's PX domain and PI (3)P in trans. Moreover, the lipid dequenching assay of fluorescently labeled proteoliposomes was observed, which is not indicative of symmetric lipid mixing between the two proteoliposome populations. The study concluded that proteoliposomes can undergo trans-SNARE interactions that lead to asymmetric lipid dequenching without symmetrical lipid mixing or proportionate fusion.
The document discusses the mechanism by which developing neurons form circuit-specific sublayers and selective synapses during neurodevelopment. The researchers focused on the direction-selective circuit in the inner plexiform layer of mouse retina and found that newborn starburst amacrine cells establish homotypic contacts mediated by the cell-surface protein MEGF10, triggering neuropil innervation resulting in the generation of two sublayers comprising starburst-cell dendrites. The dendritic scaffold then recruits projections from circuit partners, and abolishing MEGF10-mediated contacts profoundly delays and disrupts sublayer formation, leading to broader direction tuning and weaker direction-selectivity in retinal ganglion cells. The study reveals a mechanism by which differentiating neurons transition from migratory to mature morphology and highlights its importance in forming circuit-specific sublayers in the developing nervous system.
The article discusses tumor evolutionary directed graphs (TEDG), a framework to analyze and integrate genomic data to unravel the milestones of tumor initiation, progression, dissemination, and resistance to therapy. The TEDG framework was applied to a cohort of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients over a 12-year period, revealing the time-ordered evolution of the disease, the presence of two distinct and mutually exclusive evolutionary paths, and the progressive clonal replacement with more aggressive clones. The article also describes the methodology of TEDG analysis, including the adjustment of mutation cell frequency (MCF) to unify longitudinal and cross-sectional data, and the spectral techniques for network deconvolution to remove indirect relationships. The article concludes that TEDG may constitute an effective framework to recapitulate the evolutionary history of tumors.
Coprolites (fossilized feces) of Borophagus parvus, a predatory canid species from the late Miocene of California, have been discovered with evidence of bone consumption. This suggests that the bone-crushing Borophagus potentially hunted in collaborative social groups and occupied a niche that no longer exists in North American ecosystems. The coprolites revealed concentrations signifying scent-marking behavior similar to latrines used by living social carnivorans, routine consumption of skeletons, and undissolved bones inside indicating gastrointestinal similarities to modern striped and brown hyenas. The large number of bones inside most Mehrten coprolites rules out herbivores as their producers, and the size further indicates large carnivorans as their original makers. Borophagus and bone-cracking hyaenids, such as Crocuta, share several craniodental features that are interpreted as adaptations for a durophagous (bone-consuming) diet. Comparative analyses of overall stress distributions during bite simulations indicate that the crania of Crocuta and Borophagus are more similar to each other than to Canis. The functional morphological characteristics have been used to justify classifications of both Borophagus and Crocuta as specialized bone-cracking ecomorphs.
The ParABS system is important for bacterial chromosome segregation, but exactly how the components of the system work together to generate directional motion is still uncertain. In this study, researchers used biochemical approaches, quantitative imaging, and mathematical modeling to examine the mechanism by which ParA drives the translocation of the ParB/parS partition complex in Caulobacter crescentus. Their experiments and simulations grounded on experimentally-determined biochemical and cellular parameters suggest a novel 'DNA-relay' mechanism in which the chromosome plays a mechanical function. This study sheds light on how the ParABS system drives chromosomal segregation in bacteria.
The tiny dorsal nervous system of the ascidian tadpole larva, Ciona intestinalis, displays left-right asymmetry, making it an important model for studying brain asymmetry. The larva has 177 neurons forming a connectome of 6618 synapses, including neuromuscular and gap junctions. The neurons are unipolar with few synapses, some of which are unpolarized, and most have ciliary organelles. Despite equal cell numbers on both sides, neuron identities and pathways differ between the left and right sides. The larva's CNS generates asymmetric swimming patterns by having an obvious asymmetrical organisation with externally visible structural brain asymmetries, such as pigment spots and the right-sided ocellus. Ascidians have simplified nervous systems with small numbers of cells, allowing for the possibility of uncovering the complete network of neuronal synaptic connections or connectomes, a study that could not be conducted in large, complex brains where brain asymmetries are often cryptic.
The UNC93B1 protein is essential for the function of various Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that recognize microbial features and trigger immune responses. UNC93B1 controls the transport of TLRs from the endoplasmic reticulum to endolysosomes, but the mechanism by which it does so is unclear. This study reveals that UNC93B1 directly controls packaging of TLRs into COPII vesicles that bud from the ER and remains associated with the TLRs during post-Golgi sorting steps. The trafficking mechanisms of TLRs to endolysosomes differ, with TLR9 requiring UNC93B1-mediated recruitment of the adaptor protein complex 2 for delivery, while TLR7, TLR11, TLR12, and TLR13 utilize alternative pathways. The study suggests that UNC93B1 controls endosomal TLR trafficking and may explain the distinct roles these receptors play in autoimmune diseases.
Researchers have identified the virulence effectors of the rice blast fungus that play a role in its specialization to particular local rice subspecies. The findings, based on a traditional centuries-old rice agro-system of the Yuanyang terraces, revealed major differences in components of basal immunity and effector-triggered immunity of the japonica and indica rice varieties which were associated with specialization of Magnaporthe oryzae. Effector proteins that are secreted during infection target cellular processes of the host to promote infection, and are believed to be mostly involved in the suppression of host immunity. The role of effector proteins understanding host range of plant pathogens is crucial to developing durable means of controlling disease, phytosanitary regulations and policies.
The study examines audio-haptic coordination and multisensory integration in the auditory cortex of rats during social interaction. The researchers find that facial touch leads to an increased rate of ultrasonic vocalizations that are emitted at the whisking rate and are initiated in the retraction phase of whisking. Facial touch induces inhibition in the primary auditory cortex, and touch modulates the auditory cortex neurons' responsiveness to ultrasonic vocalizations. The study also reveals that whisking and vocalization are coordinated during facial touch, and the neuronal responses to ultrasonic vocalizations in the auditory cortex are excitatory and cell-type dependent.
The study investigates how temporal sequences of events are stored and represented in working memory and its behavioral significance in human subjects. The researchers recorded electroencephalography (EEG) in combination with a temporal response function (TRF) method to dissociate item-specific neuronal reactivations. They found that serially remembered items are successively reactivated during memory retention. The replay is in a temporally reversed order and is strongly related to the recency effect in behavior. In addition, the study examines the use of task-irrelevant color probes to tag memory-related activations during retention. The results show that the task-irrelevant color probes did carry memory-related information, and they could be used to tag memory-associated reactivations during maintenance. Finally, the study examines how a temporal sequence and the associated order information is maintained in working memory using a behavioral task.
Researchers explored how microbial communities are shaped by individuals' surroundings, specifically individuals with whom they interact. They surveyed fecal, oral, and skin microbiota of 60 families with varying structures (spousal units with children, dogs, both, or neither) to quantify microbial exchange. They found that cohabiting couples share more microbiota, particularly on the skin, than individuals from different households. Dog ownership increases the shared skin microbiota in cohabiting adults, and dog-owning adults share more "skin" microbiota with their own dogs than with other dogs. Overall, family membership explains a large proportion of bacterial diversity, and microbial communities are more similar within families than between them.
A study has found that the free-living herbivore Tupiocoris notatus transfer cytokinins (CKs) to increase food quality and minimize the fitness consequences of its feeding. The insect transferred the CK N6-isopentenyladenine from insects to plants through their oral secretions. The herbivores manipulate source/sink relationships to increase the nutritional value of infested tissues. The plant directs energy away from defence mechanisms to try and recover nutrients. Tupiocoris notatus preferentially attacked leaves with transgenically increased CK levels which promoted better food quality. In contrast, infestation with M. sexta in nature, "surprisingly," does not decrease plant fitness despite resulting in damage to large portions of photosynthetically active leaf area.
A study investigated the impact of the increase in soybean oil consumption in the United States on small intestinal microbiota by analyzing the effects of linoleic acid (18:2), the main fatty acid in soybean oil, on Lactobacillus reuteri and L. johnsonii. In vitro evolution tests showed that these species acquired strong resistance to 18:2 with mutations in genes for lipid biosynthesis, acid stress, and cell membrane or wall. However, small intestinal lactobacilli populations in mice were not affected by chronic and acute 18:2 exposure; both sensitive and resistant strains were present. These results show that the extant small intestinal lactobacilli have adapted to their gut environment and can evolve resistance to toxic dietary components. While antibiotics can cause lasting alterations to the microbiome, dietary perturbations rarely do so.
Researchers have identified clusters of spiking and nonspiking interneurons in grasshoppers and other orthopteroid insects that transform sensory input into changes in leg position during the maintenance of a standing position and organize more complex behaviors such as walking and flight. These clusters follow a developmental logic in which specific clusters arise from the same neuronal stem cell. The neuronal lineages become adapted to specific behavioral functions. The authors of the paper applied the same strategy to examine the functional organization of the spinal cord in vertebrates, in Drosophila. Each NB (neuronal stem cell) is uniquely identifiable and characterized by its position in the array, its pattern of molecular expression, and the suite of early neurons that it produces. Hemilineages, sets of neuronal cousins, account for 90% or more of the neurons in each thoracic hemisegment. These authors used genetic approaches to define the anatomy of these hemilineages and to assess their functional roles. The hemilineages provide a functional as well as an anatomical ground plan for the thoracic nervous system, and thorax-mediated behaviors occur by combinations of simple movements elicited by relatively simple ventral hemilineages, which are then orchestrated by a hierarchy of increasingly complex dorsal hemilineages.
The RNA binding protein RBMXL2 is conserved in placental mammals and is expressed in male meiosis, controlling splicing patterns during this stage. RBMXL2 controls aberrant splice site selection and prevents disruption to gene expression by buffering high ambient concentrations of splicing activators. Deletion of the Rbmxl2 gene blocks spermatogenesis in mice, causing a major block during diplotene that prevents entry into metaphase I, with defects becoming already apparent during pachytene. RBMXL2 is essential for meiosis, and its absence induces progressive defects in male mouse meiotic prophase. Male mice without Rbmxl2 die via apoptosis because of severe disruption of testicular histology. RBMXL2 affects the transcriptome of male meiosis, and though overall gene expression patterns were similar between wild type and Rbmxl2-/- 18dpp testes, differences were detected in Fsip2, Cul4a, Slc9c1, Tex15, Myf6, Nxn, and Cyr61, with subtle expression changes observed in these genes. Sixteen gene expression changes in the Rbmxl2-/- testis were for predicted non-coding RNAs of unknown function.
The medial temporal lobes, specifically the hippocampus area, play an important role in episodic memory but it is unclear if it loses its ability to retrieve contextual information over time. This study used functional neuroimaging to compare neural activity during immediate and delayed recognition and found that recollection-related activity in the posterior hippocampus declined after a 1-day delay, while activity remained stable in the anterior hippocampus and neocortical areas. The study highlights the importance of accounting for differences in the regional specificity of memory changes within the medial temporal lobes in neurobiological models of memory.
Apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1), the major protein in high-density lipoprotein (HDL), has anti-inflammatory properties. In order to better understand these properties, the researchers tested the effect of acute human apoA1 exposure on the migratory capacity of monocyte-derived cells in vitro and in vivo. Acute apoA1 treatment was found to reduce macrophage chemotaxis to different chemoattractants, including CC chemokines. ApoA1 disrupts membrane lipid rafts and dampens the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. The anti-inflammatory effects of apoA1 may have potential use in cases where reduced monocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation would be beneficial. The researchers also found that the inhibitory effects of apoA1 on macrophage chemotaxis are independent of ABCA1, but dependent on cholesterol efflux. The study involved both murine and human monocyte-derived cells.
This study investigates the role of the Par protein complex in the formation and differentiation of endomesodermal epithelial cells in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis. The absence of Par proteins in endomesodermal cells contrasts with their presence in ectodermal cells, and is associated with disruption in cell-cell adhesion and paracellular movement. The study uses gene editing techniques to demonstrate the vital role of Par proteins in maintaining ectodermal integrity, and highlights the functional differences between junctional complexes in endomesodermal and ectodermal cells. The study sheds light on the evolution of epithelial structure in early animal development.
The use of tissue microarrays (TMAs) in cancer biomarker studies has become widespread, but the impact of batch effects on TMA-based studies has not been systematically assessed. In a study evaluating 20 protein biomarkers on 14 TMAs from 1,448 primary prostate cancers, between-TMA variation was found to explain between 1% and 48% of biomarker levels. This variation was assessed using different approaches to mitigate batch effects, with correlations between values adjusted by different methods being higher than between uncorrected values and corrected values. The impact of handling batch effects on commonly performed biomarker analyses was also demonstrated, with associations with clinical features changing substantially after addressing batch effects. The study concludes that batch effects and resulting bias are not an error of an individual study, but an inherent feature of TMA-based protein biomarker studies that need to be considered during study design and addressed analytically in studies using more than one TMA.
Researchers have discovered a new mechanism by which an intermediate in one biosynthetic pathway in the soil bacterium Pseudomonas protegens co-regulates with another pathway. The study found that phloroglucinol, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of the antibiotic compound 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol, could be transformed by a halogenase encoded in the same gene cluster as the biosynthetic pathway for pyoluteorin, which is another antibiotic. The result helps P. protegens coordinate the release of two distinct chemicals that are deployed in cooperative and competitive interactions. The research could be used to enhance beneficial bacteria in agricultural settings.
The Rsp5-ART ubiquitin ligase adaptor network functions as a quality control mechanism to protect plasma membrane integrity by removing misfolded integral membrane proteins during proteotoxic stress. Failure to do so can lead to toxic accumulation of proteins at the cell surface, resulting in loss of plasma membrane integrity and eventual cell death. This network works in parallel with other quality control pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi to target degradation of damaged or misfolded proteins and limit accumulation of specific proteins during proteotoxic stress. Heat stress triggers extensive endocytic downregulation of plasma membrane cargo, which is associated with misfolding or conformational flux of integral membrane proteins, causing loss of plasma membrane integrity. The protein quality control system, often referred to as the cellular proteostasis network, consists of an elaborate network of proteins that prevents the toxic accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins.
This study analyzes the chromatin landscape and histone modifications during the maternal-to-zygotic transition in embryos of Drosophila melanogaster. The authors found that histone modifications increased dramatically over the transition, with some marks being absent at earlier stages but showing sharp increases later on. The authors also identified a role for the transcription factor Zelda in triggering a cascade of events that leads to the accumulation of specific histone modifications and subsequent activation of specific sequences. The study provides new insights into the complex regulatory mechanisms underlying early embryonic development.
A recent study analyzing neuronal ensemble activity in the motor cortex of two people with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) found that human motor cortex has a similar dynamical structure to that of non-human primates, indicating that human motor cortex contains a similar underlying dynamical system for movement generation. This stands in contrast to the prevailing view that motor cortical neural activity represents muscle or movement parameters. The participants in the study had different degrees of motor impairment due to ALS, which means that these results do not conclusively show that dynamical activity is present in healthy human motor cortex, but they do suggest that further research is warranted.
Researchers studying Drosophila miranda identified two refinements in the transposable element ISX that enable it to improve the binding affinity to the dosage compensation complex, rendering it more fully functional. The mutations have a high prevalence in Drosophila miranda, indicating that high levels of gene conversion among similar transposable elements allow them to 'crowd-source' refining mutations, with a single refining mutation being spread across insertion sites by non-allelic gene conversion and later evolved across population levels. According to the researchers, this process represents a novel method for fully functional regulatory elements to appear rapidly from transposable elements and suggests that non-allelic gene conversion’s accelerating the evolutionary fine-tuning of regulatory networks is of importance.
The Cuatro Ciénegas Basin in Mexico with its extreme unbalanced nutrient stoichiometry is an endangered oasis that may serve as a model for a lost world. The ancient niche of extreme unbalanced nutrient stoichiometry led to the survival of ancestral microorganisms in the basin, generating a diverse and unique bacterial community. Several endemic clades of Bacillus invaded the Cuatro Cienegas region in two geological times. Cuatro Ciénegas Basin conservation is vital to the understanding of early evolutionary and ecological processes. The diversity within Cuatro Ciénegas Basin's small scale is immense compared to other environments. Bacillus species from Cuatro Ciénegas Basin date back to the Ediacaran and the late Jurassic period. The presence of endemic and early divergent clades provides strong evidence for the lost world scenario.
Researchers have discovered that a population of immature neurons called Purkinje cell precursors (iPCs) can regenerate almost fully following the ablation of mouse Purkinje cells (PCs) at birth. The iPCs are able to enter the cell cycle and support normal cerebellum development but their number diminishes soon after birth, making PCs poorly replenished when ablated at postnatal day five. However, the cerebellum was found to rapidly recover its PC numbers after the loss of approximately 50% of PCs at birth, resuming normal growth within 24-48 hours. The study provides a new paradigm in the field of neuron regeneration by identifying a population of immature neurons that buffers against perinatal brain injury in a stage-dependent process.
Thyroid hormone (TH) has opposite effects on neural crest derived pigment cells in zebrafish, limiting melanophore population expansion but increasing yellow/orange xanthophore numbers. A study was conducted to analyze individual transcriptomes from thousands of neural crest-derived cells, reconstruct developmental trajectories, identify pigment cell-lineage specific responses to TH, and assess roles for TH receptors. The study shows that TH promotes maturation of both cell types but in distinct ways. In melanophores, TH drives terminal differentiation, limiting final cell numbers. In xanthophores, TH promotes accumulation of orange carotenoids, making the cells visible. TH receptors act primarily to repress these programs when TH is limiting. The study provides insights into post-embryonic neural crest lineages, contributes resources for studying adult pigment cells and other neural crest-derived cell types, and illustrates how a circulating endocrine factor influences local cell behaviors to coordinate adult trait development.
Research has been conducted into translational regulation by Drosophila Pumilio (PUM) and Nanos (NOS), which are important regulatory proteins in development, fertility and neuronal functions. The research demonstrates how the specificity of one protein (PUM) is modified by the cooperative RNA recognition with a second protein (NOS) to synergistically repress mRNA. The research provides insight into the molecular mechanism of a regulatory switch controlling key gene expression programmes and how the partnering of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) induces changes in binding specificity that underlie regulatory network dynamics. The results also illuminate novel sub-optimal PUM sites and how they are regulated in vivo.
CHARGE syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1/15,000, is primarily caused by mutations in the CHD7 gene. The developmental defects in the brain associated with CHARGE syndrome are not well understood. However, recent research has shown that Chd7 haploinsufficiency leads to reduced expression of Fibroblast Growth Factor 8 (Fgf8) in the isthmus organiser (IsO), an embryonic signalling centre that directs early cerebellar development. Fgf8 is a key gene in early cerebellar development and its level of expression and FGF signalling in the embryonic midbrain must be tightly controlled. Studies have shown that the cerebellar vermis, the most anterior part of the cerebellum, is the most sensitive to perturbations in FGF signalling during development. Patients with CHARGE syndrome and a proven CHD7 mutation showed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in 35% of cases. CHD7 also associates with Otx2 and Gbx2 regulatory elements and altered expression of these homeobox genes implicates CHD7 in the maintenance of cerebellar identity during embryogenesis. These results provide key insights into the molecular aetiology of cerebellar defects in CHARGE syndrome and link reduced FGF signalling to cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in humans.
The Roundabout 2 (Robo2) receptor is crucial for maintaining inhibitory synapses in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the brain. Its absence in adult mice results in altered neural activity patterns, increased dopamine release, hyperactivity, learning difficulties, and a reversal of responses to psychostimulants. Robo2 regulates inhibitory synaptic connectivity of the VTA, and disruptions to this can lead to behavioural disorders such as addiction and schizophrenia. Robo2 is broadly expressed in the adult brain with high expression in the ventral midbrain, hippocampus and cerebellum. It is implicated in various types of mental illness such as autism and bipolar depression.
A study of East Asian and White participants living in the San Francisco Bay Area has found marked differences between ethnic groups in gut microbiome richness and community structure. White individuals were enriched for mucin-degrading Akkermansia muciniphila, while East Asian subjects had increased levels of multiple bacterial phyla, fermentative pathways detected by metagenomics, and the short-chain fatty acid end-products acetate, propionate, and isobutyrate. These differences in the gut microbiome could not be explained by dietary intake and were associated with current geographical location. Microbiome transplantations into germ-free mice demonstrated stable diet- and host genotype-independent differences between the gut microbiomes of East Asian and White individuals that differentially impact host body composition. The findings suggest that ethnicity should be considered in microbiome research and may help explain ethnic differences in metabolic disease rates.
Research has identified dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) as critical for the initiation of fear extinction learning. Using single-unit electrophysiology and fiber photometry, the study found that when the aversive unconditioned stimulus (US) was omitted during fear extinction, dopamine neurons in the VTA were activated. This dopamine signal occurred specifically during the onset of extinction and correlated strongly with extinction learning. Optogenetic manipulation of these dopamine neurons revealed that the signal is both necessary for and sufficient to accelerate normal fear extinction learning. The findings have clinical implications for anxiety disorders, as deficits in safety learning through extinction are a hallmark of these disorders.
Researchers investigated the physiological role of the conserved lncRNA Norad in mice and found that its deletion results in genomic instability, mitochondrial dysfunction, and a degenerative phenotype resembling premature aging, caused by augmented activity of PUMILIO proteins. Norad is the preferred RNA target of PUMILIO2 in mouse tissues and upon loss of Norad, PUM2 hyperactively represses key genes required for mitosis and mitochondrial function. The findings provide new insights into the roles of noncoding RNAs and RNA-binding proteins in normal physiology and aging.
Researchers have developed an in vitro model of human skeletal muscle that can be used for physiological and pharmacological studies. The system uses primary myogenic cells to engineer electrically and chemically responsive, contractile human muscle tissues, known as "myobundles". These biomimetic constructs exhibit aligned architecture, multinucleated and striated myofibers and can contract spontaneously and respond to electrical stimuli with twitch and tetanic contractions. They also maintain functional acetylcholine receptors and structurally and functionally mature during cultivation. The myobundles respond to diversely-acting drugs with dose-dependent hypertrophy or toxic myopathy similar to clinical outcomes, thus providing an enabling platform for predictive drug and toxicology screening as well as development of novel therapeutics for muscle-related disorders. The need for an accurate preclinical model of human skeletal muscle is exemplified by the market withdrawal of cerivastatin that was well-tolerated in mice but caused fatal rhabdomyolysis in humans.
When cells undergo apoptosis, they can release signals that affect the behavior of surrounding cells in their local environment. This document reports a novel mode of communication observed in Drosophila wings, whereby apoptotic cells induce additional apoptosis in the same tissue through the signalling of Eiger (the tumor necrosis factor homolog) responsible for apoptosis-induced apoptosis (AiA). This phenomenon is observed in normal development and under pathological conditions including hair follicle growth in mice. Also mentioned is the use of "undead" cells - apoptotic cells saved from death through caspase inhibitors - to study apoptosis signalling. Apoptotic processes release mitogenic and morphogenetic proteins as signals to stimulate growth and tissue repair, including Wnt, Dpp/Bmps and Hedgehog proteins. Finally, apoptosis accounts for widespread cell loss in pathological states such as liver failure, cardiac infarction, viral infections, and ischemic stroke.
A new generation of direct electron detectors may improve electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) single-particle analysis, which has become an important tool for structural biology of large and flexible macromolecular assemblies but has not yet reached its potential due to radiation damage, poor detectors and beam-induced sample movement. Direct electron detectors exhibit improved signal-to-noise performance and are fast enough to follow particle movements during electron irradiation. Statistical movie processing compensating for beam-induced movement, was used to show that ribosome reconstructions with unprecedented resolutions may be calculated from fewer particles than used previously. This allows for high-resolution cryo-EM to be expanded to a broad range of biological specimens.
The molecular mechanisms responsible for symbiont-mediated homeostasis of animal immunity are not well understood. In this study, the authors use tsetse flies as a model system to investigate the role of symbiotic bacteria in immune system development. The flies house maternally-transmitted symbionts, Wigglesworthia and Sodalis, which regulate the development and function of the host's immune system. The authors demonstrate that Wigglesworthia up-regulates the expression of odorant binding protein six in the gut of intrauterine tsetse larvae, which is necessary and sufficient to induce systemic expression of the hematopoietic RUNX transcription factor lozenge and the subsequent production of crystal cells, which actuate the melanotic immune response in adult tsetse. Larval Drosophila's indigenous microbiota regulates a similar pathway in their host. These findings detail an evolutionarily conserved component of a blood cell differentiation regulatory pathway that occurs in response to the presence of enteric symbionts.
Researchers have identified selamectin, a drug used to treat nematode infections in humans and pets, as a chemical compound that promotes neural differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). The study used a high-throughput imaging-based screen of around 2000 bioactive compounds to identify molecules that increased the number of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons generated from mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Selamectin was one of two hit compounds, and further research showed that it increased the production of different neuronal subtypes and oligodendrocyte lineages. The team suggested that these findings could be used to treat neurodevelopmental or neurodegenerative disorders.
Researchers  have used existing MERS-CoV sequence data to explore its phylodynamics in humans and camels. The analysis shows that long-term viral evolution of MERS-CoV occurs exclusively in camels while humans act as a transient host. The researchers also identify that human outbreaks in the Arabian peninsula are driven by seasonally varying zoonotic transfer of viruses from camels. Without heretofore unseen evolution of host tropism, MERS-CoV is unlikely to become endemic in humans.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an essential mechanism for cells to cope with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress caused by an imbalance between protein folding capacity and load. In all eukaryotes, the UPR activates the transcriptional response of genes encoding ER-lumenal chaperones to increase protein folding capacity. The UPR is regulated by three ER-resident transmembrane sensors, Ire1, PERK and ATF6, which transmit information and activate transcription factors to drive the transcriptional response. Ire1 is a bifunctional transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease that detects unfolded proteins and cleaves the XBP1 mRNA to produce active XBP1. However, in the absence of XBP1 mRNA orthologues, Ire1 initiates the selective decay of a subset of ER-localised mRNAs required to survive ER stress in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. They identified Bip1 mRNA, encoding a major ER chaperone, as the only mRNA cleaved upon Ire1 activation that escapes decay. Truncation of the 3' untranslated region stabilises Bip1 mRNA, resulting in increased Bip1 translation, and allows the cell to cope with ER stress.
Researchers have discovered that the physiological unfolded protein response (UPR) plays an important role in the maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis, essential for morphogenesis of dendritic arbors (complex and type specific dendritic arbors that neurons use to receive appropriate inputs from their receptive fields and to function properly in a neural circuit) in highly branched Caenorhabditis elegans sensory neurons, such as PVD. The study suggests that the IRE-1 arm of the UPR pathway, activated in response to unfolded proteins, is induced in highly branched neurons during dendrite morphogenesis. A single transmembrane leucine-rich repeat protein, DMA-1, plays a role in the induction of the UPR and dendritic phenotype in the UPR mutants. The study implies that dendrite development might require an increased load of protein production that uses protein folding pathways.

The Trojan Female Technique (TFT) is a cost-effective, species-specific pest control technique that harnesses naturally occurring mutations in the mitochondrial genome to impair male fertility while having no effect on females. This technique has the potential to overcome limitations of conventional pest control approaches and could be applied to both invertebrate and vertebrate species. The goal of the TFT is to establish a self-perpetuating control strategy that aims at numerical population suppression. The TFT could be a valuable alternative to emerging transgenic control techniques that are currently subject to debates concerning safety and regulatory concerns. The Brownsville haplotype, a candidate TFT haplotype, is experimentally tested on Drosophila melanogaster populations, and the results show significant numerical suppression, demonstrating proof-of-concept for the TFT.
Researchers have developed a bivalent nucleosome system allowing for the study of individually modified sister histones, their contributions to chromatin structure, and effects of these modifications on gene transcription. Asymmetrically modified nucleosomes are present in multiple cell types, and the study provides the first tool for comparing symmetrical and asymmetrical modifications of sister histone H3s in vivo. The system was developed using Saccharomyces cerevisiae and involved the mutagenesis of histone H3 to allow for the constitutive assembly of asymmetrically modified sister histone H3s. The study found that modifications on sister histones could be independent of each other, and that modifications on both sister H3 histones could affect transcription in a cooperative, independent, or redundant manner.
Insects have an innate immune response to protect against infection by microbes. However, the response is poor in Drosophila eggs, due in part to the absence of the serosa, an extraembryonic epithelium found in all insects except higher flies. In contrast, the eggs of Tribolium beetles, with serosa, have a potent immune response. Researchers tested the immune function of the serosa by deleting a gene (Tc-zen1) in the beetle, which prevented the development of the serosa. They found that bacteria grew twice as fast in serosa-less eggs, indicating that the serosa provides an immune barrier, and studied immune-responsive genes in wild-type and serosa-less eggs. The study found that the serosa provides insect eggs with a full-range innate immune response.
The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRTs) are cell membrane-remodeling machinery that are responsible for a number of important cellular processes. One of the key subunits is Snf7, which is activated to form a filament that remodels membranes. Researchers have now determined the X-ray crystal structures of Snf7 in its active conformation, revealing its role in membrane-sculpting. The active conformation enables assembly of Snf7 into a filament with a 30 Å periodicity, while mutations on protein interfaces block Snf7 assembly and block ESCRT function. This study provides crucial understanding of how Snf7 is activated to promote assembly of the ESCRT-III complex, which could have important implications for cellular therapies.
The process of organ morphogenesis depends on the transmission of mechanical tensions at a supra-cellular scale through actomyosin contractile forces. The actomyosin network localizes in circumferential belts in the vertebrate neural tube. The folding of the retinal epithelium during zebrafish optic cup morphogenesis is driven by a constriction mechanism, and the myosin-dependent generation of constrictions forces in individual neuroblasts is essential for the process. Optical recordings show that apical areas remained constant between 19 and 20 hpf and even expanded (28%) at later stages, between 20 and 21 hpf. Live imaging analyses also revealed periodic contractions occurring at apical and basal cell surfaces. The constriction process appears to be species-specific mechanisms or operate coordinately in the same organism.
The medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) in animals contains grid cells that respond to periodic lattice environments. These grids are modular with spatial periods, or scales, clustered around discrete values separated by ratios ranging from 1.4 to 1.7. A proposed mechanism for the modular structure of grid cells in the MEC is through self-organization. Using attractor network models of grid formation, it is shown that inhibitory distances between neurons produce grid scales in discrete modules. A smooth increase in inhibition distance along the dorso-ventral axis of the MEC, accompanied by excitatory interactions along this axis, produces constant scale ratios between successive modules. The precise ratios that appear depend on the balance between excitatory and inhibitory interactions along the MEC axis, and are constant on average from the smallest to the largest pair of modules. Excitatory coupling between grid attractor networks dynamically induces discreteness in grid scales that is co-modular with grid orientation, as observed experimentally. It can produce consistent scale ratios and orientation differences, which can be robust to a variety of parameter perturbations, coupling architectures, and sources of noise.
Obesity can lead to hepatic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction by compromising Ca2+ storage, which is monitored by the store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) system. This study investigates the role of STIM1-mediated SOCE in obesity-related ER dysfunction. The results show that hepatocytes from obese mice have diminished SOCE due to impaired STIM1 translocation, which is associated with abnormal STIM1 O-GlycNAcylation. This impairment leads to increased cellular stress, impaired insulin action, glucose production, and lipid droplet accumulation. Conversely, over-expression of STIM1 in obese mice increases SOCE and improves systemic glucose tolerance. These findings suggest that SOCE is an important mechanism for healthy hepatic Ca2+ balance and systemic metabolic control.
The parasite responsible for malaria invades red blood cells by forming a parasitophorous vacuole. During this process, the parasite sheds several surface proteins using a membrane-bound protease called SUB2. Genetic depletion of SUB2 abolishes shedding of several parasite proteins, leading to either failed invasion with rapid red blood cell lysis or successful entry but developmental arrest. Selective failure to shed the most abundant SUB2 substrate, MSP1, reduces intracellular replication. The findings show that SUB2 activity is critical for host red blood cell membrane sealing following parasite internalization and for the correct functioning of merozoite surface proteins. The research highlights the importance of the protease in the erythrocytic life cycle and the potential drug target for malaria treatment.
Researchers have found that a naturally inactive respiratory motor circuit in bullfrogs exhibits homeostatic plasticity, which increases the synaptic strength of respiratory motoneurons and boosts motor amplitude after months of inactivity. This suggests that synaptic scaling, a form of homeostatic plasticity that increases the strength of excitatory synaptic connections, may be a critical mechanism for adult vertebrates experiencing prolonged periods of neural inactivity. The study also found that the increased synaptic strength of respiratory motoneurons enhances population motoneuron output from the respiratory network, thereby supporting respiratory motor drive when breathing is required. The findings offer new insights into the physiological necessity of homeostatic mechanisms underlying stability of neurons in functional circuits.
The document discusses a study on whether repetition suppression in the inferotemporal cortex (IT) accounts for visual memory. Monkeys were trained to view images and indicate whether they were familiar or novel, with the probability of subsequent images being familiar increasing over time. Behavioral predictions could be attributed to visual memory signals reflected as repetition suppression and combined across sensitive neurons. However, the monkeys' forgetting rates were better predicted by a linear read-out that weighted each neuron according to the information reflected in its responses. Reaction times on correct and error trials produced an x-shaped pattern that could not be accounted for by the standard drift diffusion model of decision making but could be explained by strength theory.
The article discusses the structure and function of the T4P molecular machine in the Thermus thermophilus bacteria. The machine, comprising of secretin proteins, is responsible for the extrusion of type IV pili, DNA uptake and transport of virulence factors in type II and III secretion systems. The T4P is a flexible filament that helps the bacteria to adhere and move, and also contributes to their virulence. The study focuses on the in situ structure of the T4P machinery as well as the assembled pilus in whole cells of T. thermophilus. The authors found that the secretin complex PilQ undergoes a significant conformational change as the two periplasmic gates open to make way for pilus extrusion. The authors also determined the structure of the assembled pilus, which is several micron-long flexible filaments, and discovered that numerous fibrous and straight pili extend from the cell. The study sheds light on the mechanism by which some bacteria adapt to changing environments, as well as how they develop multi-drug resistance.
The ANE syndrome is a ribosomopathy caused by a homozygous missense mutation in the nucleolar protein RBM28, resulting in defective protein folding and ribosome assembly. The mutation disrupts the function of RBM28 as a hub protein, abrogating several protein-protein interactions and causing faulty pre-LSU rRNA processing. The ANE mutation in Nop4 (an ortholog of RBM28 in yeast) impairs growth and pre-rRNA processing, indicating a disruption of ribosome biogenesis. The study used yeast as a model system to elucidate the molecular basis of the ANE syndrome mutation, which is attributed to a single amino acid substitution, L351P, in RBM28.
The entry and extrusion of cations is important for the functioning of living cells. In certain alkaliphilic prokaryotes, high external pH activates voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav) which allow Na+ to enter and be used as a substrate for cation/proton antiporters responsible for cytoplasmic pH homeostasis. The article describes a new member of the prokaryotic voltage-gated Na+ channel family that is non-selective among Na+, Ca2+, and K+ ions but can be converted into selective channels for Na+ or divalent cations through mutations. The article characterizes the voltage-, pH- and temperature-dependence of Bacillus Nav channels and finds that higher temperature and pH are needed to reduce the activation threshold of channel opening. Finally, the study identifies drugs that target Bacillus Nav channels and also block the growth of the bacteria.
Sleep deprivation can cause structural changes in the brain, specifically in the dendritic spines, which can impair memory consolidation. Researchers found that five hours of sleep deprivation reduces dendritic spine numbers in hippocampal area CA1 in mice and increases activity of the filamentous actin severing protein cofilin. Recovery sleep can normalize these structural alterations. Suppression of cofilin function prevents spine loss and impairments in long-term memory caused by sleep deprivation. The activity of cofilin is caused by cAMP-degrading phosphodiesterase-4A5 (PDE4A5), which hinders cAMP-PKA-LIMK signaling. Attenuating PDE4A5 function prevents changes in cAMP-PKA-LIMK-cofilin signaling and cognitive deficits associated with sleep deprivation. Short periods of sleep loss can affect dendritic structure in the hippocampus, which has been shown to play a critical role in memory storage.
The tumor suppressor PIP3 phosphatase PTEN is frequently mutated in cancer, and its regulation by phosphorylation is poorly understood. To gain insight into PTEN regulation by phosphorylation, researchers generated semisynthetic site-specifically tetra-phosphorylated PTEN using expressed protein ligation. They found that phosphorylated PTEN has reduced catalytic activity and membrane affinity, and suggest that there is a competition between membrane phospholipids and PTEN phospho-tail for binding to the C2 domain. These findings reveal a key aspect of PTEN regulation and suggest pharmacologic approaches for direct PTEN activation. Tetraphosphorylated PTEN has a more compact conformation in which the C-tail appears to interact with the C2 domain in a manner that reduces its affinity for lipid membranes and diminishes its catalytic activity.
A new study using the Caenorhabditis elegans worm as a model has analysed how tissue material properties and mechanical forces impact embryonic elongation, with a focus on stiffness and force anisotropy. The epidermal actomyosin cytoskeleton was found to help elongate the embryo by increasing hydrostatic pressure and squeezing it circumferentially, while stiffness in the dorso-ventral cells came to play a critical role in promoting elongation in the antero-posterior direction. Laser ablation was used to map mechanical stress distribution in the epidermis and assess the level of tissue stiffness. This study demonstrates the importance of material properties and mechanical stress on cell behaviour, a topic that has been less studied in vivo than its influence on cell behaviour in vitro.
Researchers have discovered a new protein that plays a crucial role in regulating the function of brain cells. The study focuses on a protein called MPP2, which interacts with small molecules called SK2-containing channels. These channels are found in the synapses of brain cells where they play a key role in regulating the flow of electrical impulses between neurons. By modulating the activity of these channels, MPP2 helps to regulate the functions of local networks, which in turn impact a range of brain functions including learning and memory.
The transposition of bacteriophage Mu is used as a model to understand DDE transposases and integrases. The Mu transposase, MuA, belongs to the DDE family of recombinases and moves or copies its DNA sequence from one location to another. MuA binds specific sequences at each end of their element and synapse them together in the transpososome. The transpososome then hydrolyzes the phosphate backbone at the boundary between the transposon and flanking host DNA and catalyzes the attack of the resulting 3’ hydroxyl groups from each transposon end into the target destination DNA. The entire prophage acts as a transposon and strand transfer occurs every 5 bp apart in the target DNA. Mu is a good model system because transpososomes can be assembled in vitro from MuA protein and short DNA substrates. Mu is used to investigate the effect of target DNA bending on the transposition reaction. Mu investigates the ramifications of target DNA bending on the transposition reaction. Enhancing the flexibility or prebending the DNA increases its affinity for transpososomes by over an order of magnitude and increases the overall reaction rate. The conformation of the target DNA after strand transfer is involved in preventing accidental catalysis of the reverse reaction. After strand transfer, the transposase must avoid catalysis of the reverse reaction in the time before host machinery completes transposition. All available structures of these enzymes at the end of the transposition reaction, including Mu, exhibit significant bends in the transposition target site DNA.
Researchers have identified a "master regulator of the melanocyte lineage," called Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), which controls the proliferation, migration, invasion and DNA replication and repair of both normal melanocytes and melanoma cells. A fully comprehensive characterization of the MITF interactome has led to the discovery of a novel form of the PBAF chromatin remodelling complex, which is essential to melanoma's regulating transcription. The research has shown that understanding the molecular function of MITF is important in the diagnosis and treatment of melanoma. 
The Drosophila tracheal system is a network of tubes that forms in embryos without cell division, but some cells divide during the third instar larval stage. These dividing cells show respect to lineage restriction boundaries, corresponding to domains of gene expression, which suggests that Tr2 is made up of developmental compartments. The Tr2 tracheoblasts grow and reshuffle in preparation for metamorphosis, with programs of cell division unique to Tr2 that repopulate its branches with many cells. These branches also express certain genes that are responsible for specialization and branch formation, but it is uncertain whether different branches exist with unique genetic addresses. Developmental compartments are regions whose cells all share a unique genetic address and are clonally isolated. The work described in the document investigated cell lineage parameters in the Drosophila tracheal system during the third instar larval stage, finding evidence of coincident lineage and gene expression domains. They identified genes expressed in discrete regions of Tr2, including Sal, Cut, and Kni transcription factors, Notch ligands Serrate and Delta, the EGF ligand Vein, and Wingless (Wg).
The study reports that a certain isoform of the p53 protein, Δ133p53β, promotes cancer cell invasion and increases risk of cancer recurrence and death in breast cancer patients, regardless of the mutation status of the TP53 gene. The researchers demonstrate that the isoform plays a crucial role in defining invasiveness in a panel of breast and colon cell lines expressing wild-type or mutant TP53, inducing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). The study challenges the prevailing notion that TP53 mutation status is an accurate predictor of cancer progression and establishes that certain isoforms of the p53 protein can promote invasiveness. Furthermore, the researchers developed a nested RT-PCR method to detect and identify Δ133p53α, Δ133p53β and Δ133p53γ mRNA variants in tumor samples, which allows for an investigation of the association of these variants with clinico-pathological markers and patient clinical outcomes.
Perisynaptic glial cells called Terminal/perisynaptic Schwann cells (TPSCs) are found at the neuromuscular junction and respond to nerve-derived substances such as acetylcholine and purines. The genetic evidence provided indicates that activity-induced calcium accumulation in neonatal TPSCs is mediated by one subtype of metabotropic purinergic receptor. Calcium responses in TPSCs regulate postsynaptic function and muscle fatigue by regulating perisynaptic potassium. High-frequency stimulation of muscle raises the level of extracellular K+ or [K+]o causing muscle fatigue by blocking the production of muscle action potentials. TPSCs respond to 45 s of 40 Hz tonic phrenic nerve stimulation by increasing cytosolic Ca2+ levels. ATP or muscarine elicited a response in Schwann cells along distal phrenic nerve branches as well as TPSCs. Ca2+ signals in TPSCs of the P7 diaphragm were eliminated by the wide spectrum P2 antagonist suramin completely.
The insect central complex (CX) is a brain region involved in navigation, but how its neuronal diversity is generated and related to function is not clear. By mapping the developmental origin of four key CX neuronal subtypes, researchers found that neurons with similar origins had similar connectivity, and that the Eyeless/Pax6 transcription factor regulated the development of two CX subtypes important for navigation. Loss of Eyeless impaired adult flies' ability to perform celestial navigation. The study also identified the temporal transcription factors required to specify each subtype and found that old intermediate neural progenitors (INPs) express Eyeless and give rise to two neuron subtypes, P-FR and E-PG, while young INPs give rise to P-EN and P-FN. Eyeless regulates the production of each subtype, promoting E-PG and P-FR and repressing P-EN and P-FN, and is important for the anatomical connectivity of each subtype. The study's findings provide insight into how adult flight navigation neurons develop and may inform future research into manipulating developmental genetic programs to alter the number and function of each subtype of CX neurons.
Researchers have developed a new method, called fluorouracil-labeled RNA sequencing (Flura-seq), for analyzing the dynamic adaptations of metastasis-initiating cells to the microenvironments of different organs. The approach uses cytosine deaminase to metabolically label nascent RNA in rare cell populations in situ for purification and sequencing, and revealed hundreds of unique, dynamic organ-specific gene signatures depending on the microenvironment in mouse xenograft breast cancer micrometastases. Specifically, the mitochondrial electron transport Complex I, oxidative stress, and counteracting antioxidant programs were induced in lung micrometastases compared to mammary tumors or brain micrometastases. The sensitivity, robustness and economy of Flura-seq are broadly applicable beyond cancer research.
The RUNX1 gene, a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cells, has been identified as a mutated gene in human luminal breast cancer. This study found that Runx1 is expressed in all subpopulations of murine mammary epithelial cells except the secretory alveolar luminal cells, and that the loss of Runx1 contributes to a decrease in estrogen receptor-positive mature luminal subpopulations, which may lead to the development of ER+ luminal breast cancer when under the background of TP53 or RB1 loss. The study further explores how the loss of Runx1 affects the development of normal MECs.
Researchers have used ancestor protein reconstruction to investigate the evolution of a protein complex that controls spindle orientation in animal cells. The complex is essential for the generation and maintenance of organized tissues in multicellular organisms, yet little is known about the mechanisms that underlie its evolution. The researchers found that the GK protein interaction domain (GKPID) mediates spindle orientation by linking motor proteins to a marker protein on the cell cortex. They also discovered that the complex evolved through a series of molecular exploitation events, including the evolution of GKPID's capacity to bind to the cortical marker protein. Using maximum likelihood phylogenetics, the researchers were able to reconstruct the sequences of ancestral members of the protein family that contain guanylate kinase (gk) enzymes and GKPIDs. This allowed them to trace their functional evolution through time and to investigate the genetic and biophysical mechanisms that mediated the evolution of the GKPID's new functions.
The lateral intraparietal area (LIP) is important for understanding eye position computation in the brain, but its contribution to this process has been debated. To investigate, researchers predicted eye position and saccade direction from populations of LIP neurons and found that both signals were accurately predicted before, during, and after a saccade, supporting their role in visual functions. The study involved a delayed memory saccade task performed by two adult male rhesus monkeys and employed Bayesian inference to model the neuronal population code (NPC), which describes the accuracy of cortical computations in an area relevant to a task. The NPC accuracy was determined using the proportion of veridical maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates for each behavior across all trials. Three oculomotor behaviors were studied: presaccade eye position, saccade direction, and postsaccade (future) eye position. The NPC was computed separately for each behavior, and the postsaccade eye position was dependent on the presaccade eye position and saccade direction. Additionally, a technique called Recursive Neuronal Elimination (RNE) was used to rank the contributions of each neuron to the NPC.
The Tip60 histone acetyltransferase controls stem cell proliferation and differentiation by activating or silencing specific genes. This study has found that the class II histone deacetylase (HDAC) Hdac6 is a stable interaction partner with Tip60-p400 complex in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), adult neural stem cells and some cancer cells. Hdac6 is necessary for regulation of most Tip60-p400 target
The study explores the role of the HIPPO signaling pathway in controlling cell positioning and expression of Sox2, the first marker of pluripotency in the mouse early embryo. The study shows that maternal and zygotic YAP1 and WWTR1 repress Sox2 while promoting expression of the trophectoderm gene Cdx2 in parallel. Sox2 is more sensitive than Cdx2 to Yap1/Wwtr1 dosage, leading cells to a state of conflicted cell fate when YAP1/WWTR1 activity is moderate. The HIPPO signaling pathway resolves conflicted cell fate by repositioning cells to the interior of the embryo. The study concludes that LATS2 promotes inside cell positioning by regulating the activities of YAP1 and WWTR1.
Researchers have used genetic engineering to create transgenic pigs that express three microbial enzymes (β-glucanase, xylanase, and phytase) in their salivary glands, resulting in enhanced digestion of non-starch polysaccharides and phytate in pig feed. This has led to a reduction in the fecal output of nitrogen and phosphorus by 23.2-45.8%, improved growth rates by up to 24.4%, and an 11.5-14.5% improvement in feed conversion rate. These transgenic pigs are considered a promising resource for improving feed efficiency and reducing environmental impact in the global pig production industry.
This document discusses the role of Toll receptors in brain development and demonstrates that Toll-2 maintains the survival of MyD88+ neurons during brain development. Toll receptors are known for their function in innate immunity, but they also have non-immune functions in development and in the central nervous system. Tolls and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) can promote neuronal survival via MyD88 and neuronal death via Sarm, both in flies and mammals. Toll-2 induces cycling of adult progenitor cells via a novel pathway, that antagonizes MyD88-dependent quiescence, and engages Weckle and Yorkie downstream. Toll-2 maintains the survival of MyD88+ neurons during brain development. Knocking down Toll-2 or MyD88 reduces cell number in the pupal central brain while sustained over-expression of Toll-2 does not affect cell numbers. Toll-2 maintains neuronal survival via the MyD88 pathway. Toll receptors regulate neuronal number and brain size, modulating structural plasticity in the adult brain.
A study has shown that amino acid starvation leads to the formation of a novel reversible non-membrane bound stress assembly called 'Sec bodies' in Drosophila S2 cells. These structures are formed from components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit sites, which are involved in protein transport through the secretory pathway, and act as a protective reservoir for reconstructing a functional secretory pathway upon re-feeding, acting as a survival mechanism. Sec bodies have droplet-like properties and exhibit similarities to stress granules, another type of cytoplasmic assembly. The formation of Sec bodies represents a novel stress response mechanism to provide cell viability during and after nutritional stress.
The study explores the role of miR-142 and miR-150 in regulating breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) by activating the WNT signaling pathway and miR-150 expression. The miRNAs were found to target the APC mRNA, a component of the destruction complex that destabilizes β-catenin and suppresses the activity of the canonical WNT signaling pathway. The study found that upregulation of miR-142 enhanced the canonical WNT signaling pathway and transactivated the expression of miR-150, inducing hyperproliferation in mammary tissue. Knockdown of miR-142 reduced the clonogenicity of BCSCs in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
The document discusses a study conducted on the Tsimane, an Indigenous Amerindian population in lowland Bolivia, to see how relative household wealth and community-level wealth inequality affect psychological variables, stressors, and health outcomes. The study found that wealthier individuals showed better outcomes, while greater inequality was associated with more respiratory disease and higher blood pressure. However, psychosocial factors did not mediate the wealth-health associations. The Tsimane largely practice traditional subsistence activities such as hunting and fishing, and the population exhibits quantifiable gradients of modernization. Overall, the study suggests that relative socio-economic position and inequality may affect health across diverse societies.
The article discusses challenges in predicting evolutionary change, but notes that some progress has been made for phenotypically diverse asexual populations subject to strong selection. The article focuses on the model bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens and its adaptive 'wrinkly spreader' (WS) type. Mathematical descriptions of three necessary regulatory pathways were presented to predict both the rate at which each mutational route is used and the expected mutational targets. Testing these predictions revealed mutational hotspots that led to refined models. Unanticipated mismatch was observed between the spectra of WS-causing mutations obtained with and without selection due to low fitness of previously undetected WS-causing mutations. While predicting adaptive evolution is difficult, the authors suggest that understanding the relationship between all possible mutational routes to a particular phenotype and the set that are realized by selection could provide a starting point. The authors argue that their study on P. fluorescens provides a rare opportunity to explore the extent to which knowledge of the genotype-to-phenotype map can lead to mechanistic models for evolutionary forecasting. The study revealed that short-term mechanistic-level predictions of mutational pathways are possible, but there is a current inability to predict locus-specific mutational biases and environment-specific fitness effects. The article concludes by stating that additional research is needed to improve evolutionary forecasting.
The immune system has the potential to recognize and eliminate cancerous cells that present mutated peptides on major histocompatibility complex I (MHC-I), but why it fails to do so in many cases is unclear. Researchers used a new antigen presentation platform called PresentER to test the immunogenicity of various MHC-I ligands on thousands of tumor subclones in immunocompetent mice. They found that immunogenic tumor antigens do not necessarily lead to immune-mediated rejection when the clonal fraction (the fraction of cells bearing each antigen) is low, and that the clonal fraction necessary for rejection of immunogenic tumor subclones varies depending on the antigen. This has implications for the design of immunotherapeutics such as cancer vaccines. The researchers also discovered that the immune system's ability to surveille and eliminate nascent tumors with immunogenic subclones is limited by the fraction of cells expressing each unique antigen. These findings shed light on the underappreciated impact of tumor neoantigen heterogeneity on immune elimination of cancer cells and may explain why some tumors are not eliminated by the immune system when first arising.
The study investigates the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the regulation of circadian gene expression in the liver of mice. Using mice in which miRNA biogenesis can be inactivated specifically in the liver, the study found that while the hepatic core clock was resilient to miRNA loss, there were widespread effects on clock output gene expression. Through post-transcriptional regulation, miRNAs adjust the phases and amplitudes of rhythmic mRNA accumulation. Though few mRNA rhythms were actually generated by miRNAs, the study suggests that they function to adapt clock-driven gene expression to tissue-specific requirements. The study provides insight into the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in generating mRNA rhythms and identifies several miRNAs predicted to act as modulators of rhythmic transcripts.
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a neuromuscular disease caused by an expanded glutamine repeat in the androgen receptor (AR) protein. The exact pathogenic mechanisms of this disease are still unknown. However, researchers have found that Nemo-like kinase (NLK) promotes disease pathogenesis by phosphorylating the mutant AR, enhancing its aggregation, and promoting AR-dependent gene transcription. The researchers also discovered that loss of one copy of the NLK gene can rescue SBMA phenotypes in mice, suggesting a possible avenue for therapy development. Additionally, NLK can regulate the toxic effects of an N-terminal fragment of AR, independent of AR-mediated gene transcription. Overall, this study suggests a crucial role for NLK in controlling SBMA toxicity and reveals a novel approach to developing therapies for SBMA.
The balance of inhibition and excitation in different brain areas helps to control the way in which neurons respond to different stimuli. Scientists have been exploring how this balance is implemented across different levels of the cortical hierarchy. In a new study, researchers mapped synaptic inputs to pyramidal and parvalbumin-expressing neurons in the visual cortex of mice to see how this balance of inhibition and excitation was employed. They found that although interareal excitation was stronger in PV than in pyramidal neurons in all layer 2/3 pathways, there was a gradual scaling down of the inhibition/excitation ratio from the most feedforward to the most feedback pathway. These findings suggest that how cortical neurons respond to information depends on the hierarchy of the source and the target, the direction of information flow, and the laminar location of the target neurons.
A nationally-representative study for dengue was conducted across 70 communities in Bangladesh to determine the burden of the disease and identify key risk factors for infection. Out of 5866 individuals, 24% had evidence of historic infection, and being male and recent travel were linked to seropositivity. The study estimates that 40 million people have been infected nationally, with 2.4 million annual infections. The findings have implications for both the design of serosurveys and tackling dengue in Bangladesh. The study also highlights the lack of representativeness generated by small numbers of communities, emphasizing the importance of selecting communities randomly from across a country to estimate national incidence rates and identify risk factors for infection.
The document discusses the discovery of a new microRNA target of the tumor suppressor p53, called miR-139-5p. The study finds that p53 induces the transcription of miR-139-5p, which then inhibits an oncogenic protein called PDE4D, leading to cell growth arrest. The study also reveals a correlation between miR-139-5p expression and PDE4D expression in human colorectal tumors. The study further demonstrates that miR-139-5p acts by regulating the levels of cAMP, a signaling molecule involved in cell growth. Overall, the study sheds light on a new pathway connecting p53, microRN
Researchers have identified an important relationship between the microbiome, immune system, and tissue regeneration in Schmidtea mediterranea, a model organism that can regenerate all of its adult tissues. Changes in the microbiome and expansion of Proteobacteria coincided with tissue degeneration and ectopic lesions in the planarian worms. The researchers isolated Pseudomonas bacteria that induced tissue degeneration, and RNA screening revealed a TAK1 innate immune signaling module underlying compromised tissue homeostasis and regeneration during infection. The planarian model provides a basis for investigating the duality of inflammation in complex tissue regeneration and developing novel therapies. The development of a recirculation culture system enabled the researchers to study the planarian microbiome, which revealed compositional changes with potential implications for planarian health.
Researchers have developed a tool called LiGluD2 that allows for the optical control of ion current through GluD2 receptors. GluD receptors are part of the ionotropic glutamate receptor family, but they don't bind to glutamate and are considered orphan receptors. The lack of pharmacological tools has hindered progress in defining the ion channel function of GluD receptors in neurons. To overcome this, the researchers used a chemo-genetic approach to engineer specific and photo-reversible pharmacology in GluD2 receptors. They incorporated a cysteine mutation for site-specific conjugation with a photoswitchable pore blocker, allowing for the optical control of ion current through GluD2 receptors. This new tool may provide a means of understanding how GluD receptors contribute to brain circuit function and behavior.
Scientists have found cells can protect themselves against reductions in the activity of proteasomes, the large protein complexes that function to maintain the balance of protein levels within cells. In a study, cells that decrease the expression of individual subunits of the proteasome's 19S regulatory complex increased cell survival. This rebalancing proteostasis is conserved from yeast to humans, and protects against proteotoxic stress, which is essential to avoid diseases such as neurodegenerative diseases or cancer.

Researchers have discovered a striatal-enriched orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) called Gpr52 which can stabilise mutant huntingtin protein (mHtt) in the brain thus reducing symptoms of Huntington's disease (HD). Gpr52 is mainly enriched in the striatum and acts via cAMP-dependent but PKA independent mechanisms. The discovery has provided insights into the selective neurodegeneration observed whereas the identification of stabilizers of Htt protein may open potential therapeutic entry points for HD. Many neurodegenerative disorders are caused by progressive loss of neurons, and have no cures. Furthermore, the study of the Huntington's disease gives insights into these diseases and provides strategies for treatment.
The Fanconi anemia (FA) DNA repair pathway is critical in preventing bone marrow failure, leukemia and head and neck cancers caused by genome instability during DNA replication. Central to the pathway is the conjugation of ubiquitin to FANCD2:FANCI complexes, and monoubiquitination of FANCD2 has been proposed to activate DNA repair. A new study has reconstituted the FA pathway in vitro to reveal that monoubiquitination stabilizes FANCD2:FANCI heterodimers on double-stranded DNA through binding to higher order structures and filament-like arrays. The study also suggests that monoubiquitinated FANCD2:FANCI may be activated by DNA binding and show resistance to detergent and high-salt extraction. The study provides insight into the molecular function of most cases of FA and could be useful in developing new therapies to target DNA repair pathways.
A new study has provided the first snapshot of the interaction between the eukaryotic DNA replication’s pre-initiation complex and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) which occurs during the first step of DNA replication. Published in eLife, the research revealed that the six subunits of the pre-initiation complex assemble a near-planar ring which interacts with the DNA to create a mechanism of origin melting by eukaryotic replication. These data offer important insights into how living organisms inherit genetic information.
The study aimed to understand how sucrose intensity is encoded and used to make perceptual decisions by neurons in taste-sensitive cortices in rats. The study trained rats in a sucrose intensity discrimination task and recorded electrophysiological responses in the posterior, anterior insular cortices, and the orbitofrontal cortex. The study found that sucrose evoked a widespread response in neurons recorded in these areas, and only a few intensity-selective neurons conveyed the most information about sucrose's intensity. The pIC, aIC, and OFC neurons tracked movement direction, with OFC neurons yielding the most robust response. The study concluded that these areas provide a neural representation of perceived sucrose intensity and task-related information underlying perceptual decision-making.
Scientists have discovered a new gene that controls weight gain and obesity in mice. The gene, PDZ-RhoGEF, has been found to be crucial for the maintenance of energy and metabolic homeostasis among mammals, ensuring equal distribution of energy throughout the body. Researchers found that blocking the gene makes it difficult to build new fat cells, resulting in a reduction in adipose tissue mass, lower body weight and protection from diet-induced obesity and diabetes. The ramifications for humans remains unknown.
A new study has found that brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) facilitates histamine-evoked itch via the NPRC-NMBR mechanism in mice, revealing a previously unknown mechanism by which neuropeptides coordinate itch transmission in the spinal cord. The study involved a combination of RNA-scope ISH, genetic knockout (KO) mice, spinal siRNA knockdown, calcium imaging, pharmacological, and optogenetic approaches. The study also found that NPRC, rather than NPRA, is a major functional receptor for BNP in the spinal cord. The findings have implications for the treatment of acute itch behavior in humans.
The expansion of biliary epithelial cells (BECs) during ductular reaction (DR) is observed in liver diseases and associated with inflammation and fibrosis, but the underlying mechanism is not fully understood. In this study using mouse knockouts of beta-catenin, the researchers found that loss of beta-catenin in both hepatocytes and BECs is associated with persistent DR and fibrosis, reminiscent of cystic fibrosis (CF) histology. On the other hand, loss of beta-catenin in only hepatocytes led to resolution of injury through expansion of BEC-derived beta-catenin-positive hepatocytes. The researchers identified a novel beta-catenin-NFκB-CFTR interactome in BECs and showed that disruption of this interaction may contribute to hepatic pathology of CF. These findings suggest that the role of hepatic epithelial cells, including hepatocytes and BECs, in regulating the immune microenvironment during liver injury needs to be further investigated for the development of novel therapies.
The axolotl, a type of amphibian, has the ability to regenerate multiple organs, including the brain. While it is still unclear if regenerated neurons are diverse and connected, in a new study, researchers demonstrated that the axolotl can regenerate a diverse set of neurons after injury including electrophysiologically functional ones. However, while neurons re-form with high precision after injury, they fail to completely restore long-distance connectivity and original tissue architecture. The study suggests that functional brain regeneration in vertebrates may still be challenging, despite the regeneration of a vast range of new neurons. The authors of the study say that their results redefine expectations for brain regeneration in mammals.
The document discusses how animals use visual signals to estimate motion, and how Drosophila's visual circuitry can extract information from different inputs to improve its motion estimator. The Hassenstein-Reichardt correlator (HRC) model, which combines two input channels via a multiplication operation, is traditionally used to estimate motion in flies, but recent research suggests that departures from this model can improve motion estimation accuracy in natural environments. The document explores five computational models that consider new aspects of the motion estimation problem, and that provide nonlinear circuit mechanisms that flies and other animals might incorporate into their motion estimators. The document also discusses the hypothesis that the early visual system provides an efficient code for the natural visual environment, and how recent research suggests that efficient coding accounts for certain aspects of higher-level coding and perception. The HRC is the dominant model of motion computation in flies and other insects, but the document suggests that it is an incomplete description of Drosophila's motion estimator.
The distribution of enzymes among cell types is important for understanding the specialized function of different areas of the brain. A recent study used an activity-based proteomic analysis of primary mouse neurons, astrocytes and microglia to build a map of the cellular distribution of serine hydrolases in the brain. The analysis provided evidence for the compartmentalization of key transmission pathways such as the endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes DAGLα and DAGLβ being functionally segregated to neurons and microglia respectively. They found that disruption of DAGLβ perturbed immunomodulatory eCB/eicosanoid signals specifically in microglia and suppressed neuroinflammatory events in vivo, independently of broader effects on eCB content. Mapping the cellular distribution of metabolic enzymes could help identify pathways for regulating specialized inflammatory responses in the brain without affecting global CNS function.
Myosin 15 is a protein critical for the development and maintenance of the inner ear's hair cell stereocilia, which are essential for hearing. Two isoforms of myosin 15 have been identified and it has been found that they can selectively traffic to different stereocilia rows. In a study on mice, when the isoform 1 of myosin 15 was disrupted, leaving isoform 2 intact, the hair bundles developed normally but a critical subset of stereocilia retracted, leading to deafness. Isoform 2 was found to be responsible for the development of the staircase architecture of the hair bundle while isoform 1 maintained the shorter and mechanosensitive stereocilia rows. The study provides new insight into the regulation of hair cell stereocilia lengths and maintenance of the intricate hair bundle architecture.
The default mode network (DMN) in the human brain is typically associated with reduced activity during cognitive tasks and increased activity during internal processes such as self-reflection and imagination. However, a new study has found that the activity in the DMN actually increases during large and demanding task set switches. This activity can be split into three sub-networks: core, medial temporal lobe, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. These sub-networks encode task-relevant information during task performance and may be driven by major revisions of cognitive context, both internal and external. The study involved analyzing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data of participants switching between tasks with different rules, including no-switch, similar-task-switch, and dissimilar-task-switch. The results suggest that the increase in activity in the DMN during switch tasks is selective to the core and medial temporal lobe sub-networks.
The role of CD56 (NCAM) in human natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxic function has not been defined. In this study, deletion of CD56 on NK cell lines led to impaired cytotoxic function, failure to polarize during immunological synapse formation and severely impaired exocytosis of lytic granules. Phosphorylation of the FAK family member Pyk2 at tyrosine 402 was decreased in NK cells lacking CD56, demonstrating a functional link between CD56 and signaling in human NK cells. Reintroduction of CD56 rescued cytotoxicity, lytic granule exocytosis and Pyk2 phosphorylation. These data highlight a novel functional role for CD56 in stimulating exocytosis and promoting cytotoxicity in human NK cells.
Scientists from the University of Pennsylvania describe a mechanism by which a temperate bacteriophage can change the phenotype of a host cell by influencing the regulation of a key respiratory pathway that allows the cell to use trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) as a respiratory electron acceptor. The bacteriophage, known as HK022, integrates into a specific location on the E. coli genome, but instead of destroying the key TMAO genes and suppressing their expression, the phage completely reconfigures the regulatory pathway that governs this function to hijack it for its own purposes. The phage does this by replacing the promoter that drives transcription of the TMAO sensor kinase gene and introducing its own promoter that activates transcription of the gene in the presence of oxygen. As a result, when oxygen is depleted, cells infected with the phage have significantly less variability in their expression of the TMAO transporter genes, which means they lose the ability to use TMAO effectively as a respiratory substrate during anaerobiosis.
A new approach to tackling drug resistance in viruses has been developed by researchers who have identified dominant drug targets that suppress the emergence of naturally occurring drug-resistant variants in mice and cultured cells. New drug-resistant viruses usually arise during intracellular replication and initially express their phenotypes in the presence of drug-susceptible genomes; hence, the researchers sought out an inhibitor of the function of oligomeric capsid proteins of poliovirus that forms chimeric oligomers to produce dominant genomes. The researchers have been testing V-073, an inhibitor of viral capsid function that is currently in development for use in the poliovirus eradication campaign which fulfills the requirements of dominant drug targeting, dramatically suppressing the growth of drug-resistant viruses in murine infections and in cell culture.
This study examines the hypothesis that the central nervous system (CNS) chooses muscle activations to minimize excessive stresses and strains in joints while achieving task performance. The study uses rats and targets the paralysis of a muscle acting at the rat's knee. The researchers found that, as expected, rats compensate for the loss of muscle by preferentially increasing activation of another muscle that produces minimal medial-lateral force on the patella while also limiting deviations of joint kinematics. The study demonstrates that the CNS considers internal joint stresses and will compromise between task performance and regulation of joint stresses and strains.
The ZEITLUPE (ZTL) protein, which contains a LOV (Light, Oxygen, or Voltage) domain that responds to blue light, plays a key role in regulating the circadian timing of plants. ZTL targets and degrades clock proteins in response to allosteric differences in the protein's photocycle. By manipulating the ZTL photocycle over two orders of magnitude, researchers found that ZTL interacts with its targets independently of light, but enhances protein degradation in darkness. Kinetics of the photocycle dictate the rate of clock protein degradation and thus impact circadian period. Structural studies reveal that photocycle-dependent activation of ZTL depends on a dark-state conformation of the protein. These findings deepen understanding of how PAS/LOV proteins integrate environmental variables into complex signaling networks.
The gene NDE1, which is associated with brain developmental disorders, is crucial for genome integrity during the S phase of cell division. Mutations in NDE1 result in catastrophic DNA double strand breaks, which lead to DNA damage responses, apoptosis and a reduction in certain neurons in the brain. Nde1 is essential for CNS specific genomic quality control, for generating cortical layer II/III neurons and for maintaining the identity of neural progenitors before their terminal neurogenic division. The correlation of DNA damage and apoptosis in Nde1 mutant brains corresponds with increased DNA damage, suggesting that DNA damage occurred prior to apoptosis, and that apoptosis was one of the endpoints of DNA damage caused by Nde1 deficiency.
This study investigates how helicases, which are enzymes that unwind DNA and RNA, evolved to function on various substrates through different mechanisms. Using Mss116, a yeast DEAD-box protein that unwinds dsRNA, the study reveals the molecular basis for substrate specificity and mechanism. Mss116 interacts with all four NTPs and both RNA and DNA, and the efficiency of unwinding correlates with the stability of the 'closed-state' helicase core, a complex with nucleotide and nucleic acid. The study identifies the core-substrate interactions that govern the specificity and mechanism of Mss116 and shows how small structural changes within conserved regions can lead to specialized enzymes with new activities and cellular functions.
A study investigated the brain architecture of the alvinocaridid shrimp Rimicaris exoculata to understand possible adaptations of its nervous system to the hydrothermal sensory landscape. Its brain is modified from the crustacean brain ground pattern by featuring relatively small visual and olfactory neuropils that contrast with well-developed higher integrative centers, the hemiellipsoid bodies. The study proposes that these structures in vent shrimps may fulfill functions in addition to higher order sensory processing and suggest a role in place memory. The shrimp Rimicaris exoculata is the most intensely studied vent crustacean due to its high abundance at most sites along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and its singular lifestyle. Specimens of R. exoculata are found from 1600 to 4000 m depth and they form massive aggregations in the vicinity of the chimneys, with up to 3000 ind. m-2.
A new study has found that the gene NRF2, which regulates cellular metabolism, promotes the accumulation of intracellular cysteine, a process that is regulated by cysteine dioxygenase 1 (CDO1). The researchers found that CDO1 is preferentially silenced in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) with mutations in the negative NRF2 regulator KEAP1. CDO1 silencing leads to depletion of NADPH and promotes the proliferation of NSCLC cells by limiting the futile metabolism of cysteine to wasteful and toxic byproducts. The study also found that NRF2 promotes the activity of the pentose phosphate pathway to support the production of nucleotides, as well as serine biosynthesis to support glutathione and nucleotide production. While these metabolic pathways supported cell proliferation and tumor growth, some metabolic consequences of NRF2 activation were not favorable.
The document discusses the development of the murine first upper molar and whether certain types of variation are preferentially produced that direct phenotypic evolution along preferred directions. The study uses a novel quantitative approach to compare the development of two mouse strains with short or long molars and identifies temporal, spatial, and functional differences in tooth signaling center activity that arise from differential tuning of the activation-inhibition mechanisms underlying tooth patterning. The study finds that the variational properties of murine molar development drive morphological evolution along a line of least resistance. The study also explores the concept that developmental mechanisms bias the direction and amount of variation available to natural selection and neutral drift, with phenotypic evolution happening along "genetic lines of least resistance." The study considers two intermingled developmental constraints that seem to channel phenotypic variation and evolution in murine rodents, one of which acts on both first molars, and the other acts on the upper molar only, favoring its repeated anterior elongation in many independent populations and species. Finally, the study examines the developmental basis of upper first molar repeated evolution and finds that the distance between rudimentary buds called "enamel knots" is larger in the upper jaw, which may explain why the upper molar evolves repeatedly towards anterior elongation.
The article discusses ubiquitination, a common mechanism for altering protein function, and how this process is regulated by HECT E3 enzymes, which play key roles in tumor suppression, transcription, protein trafficking, and degradation. HECT E3s use a two-step mechanism to ligate ubiquitin to target proteins, which involves interactions between the catalytic HECT domain and the E2∼ubiquitin intermediate to promote the formation of an HECT∼ubiquitin intermediate. The second step of ligation is mediated by a distinct catalytic architecture established by both the HECT E3 and its covalently linked ubiquitin. The article focuses on Rsp5, a single essential NEDD4-family member from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and the mechanisms underlying HECT E3-mediated ubiquitination. The data reveal interactions between the HECT domain N-lobe, the HECT domain C-lobe, and its thioester-linked Ub establishing a specific architecture for ligation. This conformation confines the selection of target lysines and displays a composite active site wherein both HECT domain lobes contribute to catalysis of ubiquitin transfer.
The ATM protein kinase, known for its role in suppressing cancer, has also been found to play a role in promoting cancer by supporting migration and invasion of cancer cells in a non-canonical role. ATM activates the gene network involving IL-8, which regulates oxidative stress and promotes cell migration and invasion. This promotes metastatic potential in cancer cells. While DNA damaging agents have little effect on cell migration, ATM and oxidative stress promote cell migration independently of DSB signaling. The study provides insights into the previously unexplored contribution of the DDR kinase ATM to metastatic programs operating in cancer cells.
The study focuses on the assembly and maturation of actin-based thin filament arrays in the Drosophila indirect flight musculature. GFP-tagged actin monomers were used to identify different phases in the assembly process, including nascent array assembly, elongation primarily from the filament pointed-ends, radial growth and continuous barbed-end turnover. Fhos, a member of the conserved FHOD family of formin proteins, was identified as a primary mediator of IFM thin-filament organization. Thin filament array growth and maturation were monitored throughout pupal stages using inducible UAS-based GFP-actin transgenes. The study identified four distinct modes of GFP-actin monomer incorporation that contribute to the formation of IFM thin-filament arrays. The incorporation process was broken into stages through temporal expression control of GFP-actin88F, and the tools used to monitor the array assembly proved reliable.
The transcription factor Zeb1 has been found to control neuronal differentiation by repressing polarity genes in neuronal progenitors. This study discovered that Zeb1 inhibits polarization and retains progenitors in their germinal zone (GZ). Restored polarity signalling promotes differentiation and rescues GZ exit, offering a potential avenue for differentiative therapies. The study also reveals unexpected parallels between neuronal differentiation and mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, and suggests that active polarity inhibition contributes to altered GZ exit in pediatric brain cancers. Zeb1 is highly expressed in unpolarized cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) and its expression diminishes as these cells become polarized cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs). Developing CGNs provide an excellent model of the mechanisms regulating neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, polarization linked to morphological maturation, and GZ exit. Zinc finger and homeobox transcription factor-1 (Zeb1) is necessary and sufficient to maintain GNPs in an undifferentiated, unpolarized, transiently amplifying state.
A study has revealed that Rice stripe virus (RSV) activates the JNK signaling pathway in a type of insect called small brown planthoppers, which transmit the virus to plants. This allowed for increased viral replication in the insect, increasing the likelihood of disease incidence in plants. The virus interacts with the G protein pathway suppressor 2 (GPS2) in the insect vector, competing with GPS2 for activation machinery, and promoting the activation of JNK. Knowing the proteins that enable viral transmission could be helpful in the creation of control strategies for plant viruses.
A study conducted on Drosophila intestinal stem cells (ISCs) has shown that the Brahma chromatin-remodeling complex is crucial for ISC proliferation and damage-induced midgut regeneration. The Brm complex is required in a lineage-specific manner for ISC proliferation induced by the Scalloped-Yorkie transcriptional complex. The Hippo (Hpo) signaling pathway also has a direct impact on ISC proliferation by regulating Brm protein levels. The study highlights the important role played by Hpo signaling in regulating epigenetic components such as Brm to control downstream transcription and hence ISC proliferation. The study also shows that Brm is required for ISC proliferation in both normal and regenerating midguts, and it is required in ISCs for EC differentiation in normal midguts. The study outlines a novel mechanism of the chromatin remodeling Brm complex in maintaining adult stem cell pluripotency of epithelial tissues.
Researchers have found that early MRI scans can be used to predict the severity of epilepsy in adults with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, the most common form in adults. In testing the prediction using longitudinal multi-modal MRI, the study monitored hippocampal injury and tissue reorganisation during epileptogenesis in a mouse mTLE model. The study found that the severity of early hippocampal neurodegeneration and microstructural changes in the dentate gyrus predict the severity of the epilepsy. MRI measures were also retrospectively correlated with structural changes identified by immunohistology. 
The regulation of myoblast populations for muscle formation is a largely unanswered question. Flight muscles in Drosophila develop from adult muscle progenitor (AMP) cells that proliferate to give rise to over 2,500 myoblasts associated with the wing-disc. An initial amplification occurs through symmetric divisions and is followed by a switch to asymmetric divisions. Notch signaling controls the initial amplification of AMPs, while the switch to asymmetric division additionally requires Wingless, which regulates Numb expression in the AMP lineage. The epidermal tissue of the wing imaginal disc acts as a niche expressing the ligands Serrate and Wingless. The regulation of stem-cell proliferation is usually through signals from a ‘stem-cell niche’. Significant progress has been made in understanding these mechanisms in Drosophila. The AMPs associated with the wing imaginal disc are a novel muscle stem cell population that orchestrates the early phases of adult flight muscle development.
Researchers have discovered that sonic hedgehog (Shh) expressed from hair follicles (HFs) is crucial for the development of dentate neural stem cells in mammals. The blood-brain barrier in the perinatal dentate gyrus is leaky, meaning stem cells are exposed to blood-born factors. The HFs that expand perinatally were found to be the closest Shh-expressing cells to the dentate gyrus. The study also found that platelets contain epithelial Shh which provides Shh to the perinatal dentate gyrus and inhibition of platelet generation reduces hedgehog-responsive dentate stem cells. The study suggests that follicular Shh can affect forebrain development and be a source of Shh ligand to the brain.
The article discusses the role of heterochromatin in the regulation of gene expression and genome integrity, and the mechanisms involved in controlling heterochromatin spreading. The authors show that the Mst2 histone acetyltransferase complex in fission yeast regulates histone turnover at heterochromatin regions to prevent ectopic heterochromatin assembly, and that loss of Mst2 results in uncontrolled heterochromatin spreading and massive ectopic heterochromatin, leading to severe growth defects due to the inactivation of essential genes. The study also discovers redundant pathways that control heterochromatin spreading, and reveals a fast epigenetic adaptation response to changes in heterochromatin landscape. The findings suggest that precise regulation of heterochromatin spreading is essential to maintain stable gene expression profiles, and that promiscuous heterochromatin assembly generates epigenetic mutations that provide fast adaptations to heterochromatin stress.
Researchers have discovered that a single temporal gene, Castor, can activate two cell fate determination cascades and a sub-temporal regulatory programme to diversify the castor window. The precision of Ap cluster cell specification indicates the existence of additional players, which this study determines are controlled by an array of sub-temporal genes that act on each other and two terminal selector feedforward loops. The research shows that the sub-division of a broader temporal competence window is controlled by an elaborate sub-temporal regulatory programme triggered by one and the same temporal factor, which also triggers the terminal selector feedforward loops.
The article discusses the structure and function of sensory cilia in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. The authors use high-resolution imaging techniques to reconstruct the 3D structures of fifty of sixty sensory cilia in the C. elegans adult hermaphrodite. They identify novel axonemal microtubule organization patterns, clarify structural features at the ciliary base, describe new aspects of cilia-glia interactions, and identify structures suggesting novel mechanisms of ciliary protein trafficking. The authors argue that their findings could help to investigate the underlying ciliogenic pathways and to understand the contribution of defined ciliary structures to specific neuronal functions.
The spatial positioning of individuals within microbial communities is important to community function, however it is difficult to understand patterning in natural communities due to the multitude of cell-cell and cell-environment interactions as well as environmental variability. Through simulations and experiments on communities in defined environments, it was examined how ecological interactions between two distinct partners impacted community patterning. The study found that strong cooperation with spatially localized large fitness benefits to both partners generates a unique pattern of partners spatially intermixed by appearing successively on top of each other, insensitive to initial conditions and interaction dynamics. This intermixing was observed in two obligatory cooperative systems; an engineered yeast community cooperating through metabolite-exchanges and a methane-producing community cooperating through redox-coupling.  Thus, when ecological interactions are the major patterning force, strong cooperation leads to partner intermixing.
PARIS is a new, genetically encoded tool for studying cell-cell communication via gap junctions, which play a vital role in various physiological processes. PARIS uses an optically controlled actuator in one cell and a fluorescent receiver in an adjacent cell to detect movement of molecules across the gap junctions. PARIS was tested successfully in several cultured cell lines and in genetically defined neurons in a Drosophila brain. The tool provides high spatiotemporal resolution and cell-type specificity, allowing researchers to map functional gap junctions and study their regulation in health and disease. PARIS was also used to probe the effect of clinically relevant mutations in gap junction proteins and study gap junction activity in cardiomyocytes and the brain.
The inhibition of L-type Ca2+ channels is important for both research and therapeutics. A study has investigated C-terminus mediated inhibition (CMI) for CaV1.3 and found that multiple motifs work together to reduce Ca2+ current and influx. This inhibition provides a new paradigm for developing CaV1 inhibitors and may have therapeutic potential in Parkinson's disease. The study used α1DS-PCRD-DCRD, a channel variant, to explore CMI effects on CDI/VGA and their mechanisms, concluding that PCRD, DCRD and IQV are required for effective CMI. The study also compared CDI and VGA and found that effects on peak current densities and JCa values normally need to be backed up by concurrent CDI evaluations.
Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity (ACT) is a common side effect of chemotherapy that can lead to congestive heart failure. The genetic basis of sensitivity to anthracyclines is not yet fully understood. A panel of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from 45 individuals were exposed to varying dosages of doxorubicin, the most commonly used anthracycline. The transcriptomic response was significant and inter-individual variation was predictive of in vitro cell damage and in vivo ACT risk. The study identified hundreds of genetic variants that modulate the transcriptomic response, including 42 that act on alternative splicing. 447 response-expression quantitative trait loci (reQTLs) and 42 response-splicing QTLs were detected, which were enriched in lower ACT GWAS p-values. This map of genetic regulation of cellular response to anthracyclines could aid in setting optimal chemotherapy regimes.
Researchers have developed a new "multi-area" two-photon microscope that allows for simultaneous measurements of brain activity in primary and higher sensory areas in mice. The researchers combined this new microscope technology with anatomical labeling strategies to identify neurons that anatomically project between areas, enabling them to study the coordination of activity across neocortical areas. The technology was used to study the behavior and neuronal activity patterns in the primary and secondary somatosensory whisker cortex during a texture discrimination task. The study found that the coordination of brain activity across the two areas increased during motor behaviors such as whisking and licking. These findings demonstrate the specific functional coordination of anatomically identified neurons across sensory cortices.
The role of seipin, an ER protein involved in lipid droplet (LD) biology, in LD formation has been unclear. However, a study using Drosophila and human cells found that seipin mediates a distinct step in LD formation - the conversion of small, nascent LDs to larger, mature LDs. Seipin forms close interactions with nascent LDs to enable their growth, and in the absence of seipin, nascent LDs accumulate and fail to grow, leading to the formation of giant LDs. This study sheds light on the initial steps of LD biogenesis and identifies a molecular role for seipin in this process.
Researchers have disrupted the genes encoding a set of early arriving clathrin-coat constituents, FCHO1 and FCHO2, in HeLa cells, but endocytic coats do not disappear in this genetic background; rather clustered planar lattices predominate and endocytosis slows, but does not cease. These results demonstrate that congregation of EPS15/EPS15R and intersectin 1 at bud zones does not depend upon stoichiometric FCHO1/2.

The cucullaris muscle, which spans the transition zone between the head and trunk of vertebrates, has been the subject of an ongoing debate regarding whether it is a cranial muscle allied with the gill levators of anamniotes or instead a trunk muscle. A team of researchers used novel computed tomography datasets to reveal the broad conservation of the cucullaris in gnathostomes, including coelacanth and caecilian, two sarcopterygians previously thought to lack it. They also fate-mapped lateral plate mesoderm adjacent to occipital somites in the axolotl and demonstrated its contribution to the cucullaris. They argue that the posterior limit of cranial mesoderm in the axolotl extends caudally to the axial level of somite 3 and that the head-trunk boundary is consistent between this and the lateral plate mesoderm, and further support the hypothesis that the cucullaris is a critical component of the head-trunk connection in gnathostomes, categorizing it as a branchiomeric muscle. They discuss the importance of posterior cranial mesoderm in the evolution of the vertebrate neck.
Researchers have discovered that the antibiotic colistin exerts its bactericidal activity by targeting lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the cytoplasmic membrane (CM), rather than in the bacterial outer membrane (OM). They found that MCR-1 mediated colistin resistance in Escherichia coli is due to modified LPS at the cytoplasmic membrane, and that colistin damages the CM. The researchers used this information to develop a new therapeutic approach by using the LPS transport inhibitor murepavadin to cause LPS accumulation in the CM of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, resulting in increased susceptibility to colistin in vitro and improved treatment efficacy in vivo. Colistin is an antibiotic of last resort for multi-drug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens, and there is a desperate need to develop new approaches to enhance the efficacy of polymyxin antibiotics.
The study investigated the effects of inbreeding on plant-pollinator interactions in a dioecious plant, Silene latifolia. The study tested whether the magnitude of inbreeding effects depends on plant sex and population origin. The researchers recorded spatial, scent, color, and rewarding flower traits as well as pollinator visitation rates in experimentally inbred and outbred, male and female Silene latifolia plants from European and North American populations differing in their evolutionary histories. The study found that inbreeding specifically impairs spatial flower traits and floral scent, and that sex-specific selection and gene expression may have partially magnified these inbreeding costs for females. Moreover, the results indicate that inbreeding effects on floral scent may disrupt interactions among plants and nocturnal moth pollinators, which are mediated by elaborate chemical communication. The study highlights the importance of understanding the effects of inbreeding on plant-pollinator interactions for the conservation of component species.
A study has found that cancer cells are less reliant on glutamine catabolism to proliferate in vivo, and instead rely more heavily on cystine levels. The study showed that the cystine/glutamate antiporter xCT/SLC7A11 in conjunction with environmental cystine is needed to increase glutamine catabolism. This suggests that altered metabolism, including the increased consumption of glutamine in cancer cells, is an important determinant of glutamine anaplerosis and glutaminase dependence in cancer. The research highlights how nutrient conditions can impact cell metabolism and highlights the potential for the glutaminase inhibitor CB-839 as a therapeutic approach to treating cancer.
This study focuses on how the dosage compensation complex (DCC) is specifically recruited to the X chromosomes for transcriptional regulation in C. elegans. It has been previously found that DCC recruitment to the X chromosomes is dependent on SDC-2, SDC-3, and DPY-30, and that spreading is independent of chromosome sequence. This study found that strong recruitment sites containing a 12 bp DNA sequence motif are distributed along the length of the X chromosome and are marked by DNA-encoded nucleosome occupancy and significant overlap with high occupancy transcription factor target (HOT) sites. Weaker recruitment sites interspersed among strong sites show X-dependent activity. Moreover, the ectopic insertion of recruitment sequences and the deletion of a recruitment site resulted in a significant increase and reduction of DCC recruitment, respectively. Cooperation between multiple recruitment sites and subsequent spreading of the DCC within distinct chromosomal domains establishes the full DCC binding pattern.
The document discusses the molecular mechanisms and genetic targets of concussion-induced neurodegeneration, specifically focusing on the vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons. The study utilized a trauma model in C. elegans and mice to demonstrate a conserved neuroprotective mechanism in reducing mitochondrial electron flux through complex IV to suppress trauma-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons via redox signaling and the Warburg effect. The study also identified a link between mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS accumulation in concussive brain injury and PD. The document also discusses the importance of metabolic fluctuations in the brain and the neurometabolic cascade resulting from concussion. The study suggests that genetic targeting and modulation may be sufficient to suppress the ensuing neurodegeneration after concussive brain injury.
Researchers have discovered that epidural spinal cord stimulation (SCS) can restore somatosensation in individuals with upper-limb amputations. By percutaneously implanting SCS leads into the lateral epidural space of four subjects with upper-limb amputations, stable sensations were evoked in specific regions of the missing limb, including the fingers, palm, and forearm. The sensations were perceived to emanate from the missing limb and were occasionally naturalistic, although mostly paresthetic. While there was some consistency between the locations of stimulation and dermatomes, there was considerable inter-subject variability. This approach shows potential as a tool to restore somatosensation after amputations, particularly for individuals with proximal amputations such as shoulder disarticulations.
This study investigates the role of cellular signaling in the evolution of mating types. The model examines the factors that determine the capacity of cells to send and receive signals and how these are affected by recombination. The study suggests that selection for asymmetric gamete signaling could be the first step in the evolution of non-recombinant mating-type loci, paving the way for the evolution of anisogamy and sexes. The study examines the ligand-receptor interactions between cells and the likelihood of successful mating. The analysis explores the evolution of signaling asymmetry and shows that the population evolves to one of two equilibria.
The anterior thalamic nucleus (ATN) is believed to play a key role in the brain network that enables human memories to be formed, but its small size and location within the brain have impeded direct investigation in humans with non-invasive techniques. However, a study from researchers at University College London and Newcastle University working with eight epilepsy patients with intrathalamic electrodes has provided direct evidence for a functional role of the ATN in memory formation. Researchers demonstrated real-time communication between neocortex and ATN during successful memory encoding, with the neocortical-ATN theta oscillatory phase synchrony and neocortical-theta-to-ATN-gamma cross-frequency coupling predicting later memory for photographic scenes.

Vaccinating cattle against bovine tuberculosis (bTB) has been a long-term policy objective for countries where disease persists despite costly test-and-slaughter programs. The only viable candidate vaccine for use in cattle at this time is the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, but the practical and economic benefits of cattle vaccination hinge on the performance of a new diagnostic test that can accurately Differentiate Infected from Vaccinated Animals (a so-called DIVA test) as much as on the efficacy of vaccination. DIVA tests for BCG have already been developed, but both of these tests must still be validated and, in the case of the skin test, approved by regulatory authorities. The effectiveness of vaccination within the existing surveillance system can be assessed by comparing vaccinated or partially vaccinated herds to whole herd controls.
The PIEZO1 ion channel regulates keratinocyte migration and wound healing by controlling cellular retraction, reducing the efficiency of keratinocyte collective migration. The channel exhibits dynamic changes in its subcellular localization, concentrating at areas of the wound edge and causing local retraction at these regions. In migrating single keratinocytes, PIEZO1 is enriched at the rear of the cell, where maximal retraction occurs, and chemical activation of PIEZO1 enhances retraction during single as well as collective migration. PIEZO1 activity increases cellular retraction, reducing the efficiency of keratinocyte migration and wound healing, and inhibition of PIEZO1 results in faster wound healing in vitro and in vivo. The effects of PIEZO1 on directionality were more complex, with both PIEZO1 knockout and a GoF mutation resulting in straighter trajectories. PIEZO1 activity promotes cell polarization, and this may be mediated by regulation of the channel’s subcellular localization. PIEZO1 enrichment induces a localized cellular retraction that slows keratinocyte collective migration. The study has implications beyond wound healing to processes as diverse as development, homeostasis, disease, and repair.
Yeast cells age asymmetrically: while the mother cell ages and ultimately stops dividing, the daughter cell rejuvenates and is able to divide again. Researchers have identified a difference in pH between mother and daughter cells that causes this asymmetry. The acidity of the vacuole, an organelle within the cell, decreases as the mother cell ages but remains stable in the daughter cell, due to the differing levels of the protein Pma1. Pma1 accumulates in the aging mother cell, reducing the acidity of the vacuole, whereas it remains low in the daughter cell. The study suggests that reversing this asymmetry by reducing Pma1 levels in the mother cell could increase lifespan.
Researchers have successfully evolved and improved biomolecules using a single-step genome editing system through optimizing the CRISPR-Cas9 platform. The multiplex CRISPR system was used to create an improved cellobiose utilisation pathway in yeast, which resulted in a 10-fold increase in cellobiose fermentation rates. The system allows for marker-free gene assembly and DNA library insertion into the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome for use in directed evolution of biomolecules. The study highlights the power of CRISPR-Cas9 in accelerating selection experiments and discovering the molecular determinants that enhance biomolecule function.
The Rho GTPase Rac1 activates the WAVE regulatory complex (WRC) for actin polymerization, playing key roles in various cellular processes. Researchers reported the structure of a WRC-Rac1 complex using cryo-electron microscopy and found Rac1 on a different, conserved side of Sra1 than previously identified. Both Rac1 binding sites (the previous and the new one) are required for WRC activation, suggesting that two Rac1 molecules are engaged in the activation process. The study provides a mechanism for cells to sense the density of active Rac1 to control actin assembly.
The way in which individuals anticipate and respond to threatening events depends on environmental cues, such as frequency and sound pressure levels. In mice, the use of serial compound stimulus conditioning is employed to study these responses. The paradigm models the natural behavioral shifts that occur as the perceived probability of encountering a threat increases. In this paradigm, stimulus salience is the primary determinant of behavior and potential confounds in experiments utilizing multiple sensory stimuli. Stimulus salience is the major factor determining the form of conditioned responses during serial compound stimulus conditioning, which means that threat prediction may be related to intrinsic properties of the auditory stimuli themselves. A prediction of this model is that a 7.5 kHz conditioned stimulus presented at high spl should be perceived as more imminent and elicit more escape than the exact same conditioned stimulus presented at low spl. The study shows how salience can be used to determine the neural mechanisms in which different forms of threat prediction occur.
This study mapped the complete wiring diagram of the Drosophila larval antennal lobe, a neuropil that is similar to the vertebrate olfactory bulb. The study found two parallel circuits: a uniglomerular system and a multiglomerular system. The inhibitory local neurons putatively implement a bistable inhibitory system that can either suppress less active glomeruli in favor of more active ones or enable select glomeruli specialized for aversive odors to respond to faint stimuli in a background of high, appetitive odor stimuli. The study discusses the role of these two possible operational states, as well as the participation of neuromodulatory neurons and brain feedback neurons in the interglomerular circuits. The complete wiring diagram will support experimental and theoretical studies towards bridging the gap between circuits and behavior.
Researchers have demonstrated that the tau protein, which plays a role in neurodegenerative disorders, can undergo liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) with RNA, forming complex coacervates. By studying the phase diagram of tau-RNA LLPS using a combination of experiments and simulations, the researchers have identified the conditions that drive the system towards an LLPS state. They found that tau-RNA LLPS is reversible and is entropy-driven. The researchers hope that their findings will help understand the pathological aggregation of the tau protein and contribute to the development of new treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
Researchers have identified a protein that is crucial in enabling "short-term memory". The protein, called PKCβ, is found in some synapses in the brain and is activated by a rise in calcium levels caused by electrical stimulation. This calcium-based activation of PKCβ produces short-term information storage, or "potentiation." While other proteins have previously been identified as enabling short-term memory, researchers say that PICβ is the first Ca2+ sensor of a type known to mediate similar short-term memories.
Researchers have identified a protein, host cell factor (HCF)-1, as a co-factor that contributes to the cancer-driving activity of the MYC oncoprotein transcription factor. They found that the MYC-HCF-1 interaction plays a direct role in controlling genes linked to ribosome biogenesis, mitochondrial function, translation and more, and that interfering with this interaction can reduce cell growth, metabolite profiles, global gene expression patterns, and tumour growth in vivo. The discovery defines HCF-1 as a critical MYC co-factor and highlights it as a potential target for the development of novel anti-MYC therapies. While MYC is widely viewed as undruggable, targeting its co-factors is considered a promising therapeutic avenue.
The hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP) is a promising therapeutic target in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) due to its impact on aberrant glycosylation, which affects cancer progression and response to therapy. Glutamine limitation in PDA cells suppresses de novo hexosamine synthesis but results in increased free GlcNAc abundance, which is salvaged via N-acetylglucosamine kinase (NAGK) to generate UDP-GlcNAc pools. NAGK expression is elevated in human PDA, and NAGK deletion from PDA cells impairs tumor growth in mice. Improved understanding of the regulation of HBP in cancer could lead to novel therapeutic strategies for PDA.
The document discusses the role of reward signals in the different stages of perceptual decision-making, specifically how these signals interact with sensory information. The study conducted involved microstimulation of visual area V5/MT in monkeys while performing a visual discrimination task that varied in available reward. Results showed that microstimulation was less effective in shifting perceptual choices towards the stimulus preferences of the stimulated neurons when the available reward was larger, indicating an effect of reward on sensory representation stages of perceptual decision-making. The study used a bounded accumulation decision model to analyze behavioral performance and investigate the interaction between expected reward and sensory signals that contribute directly to perceptual decisions. The findings suggest that reward can affect skeletal level sensory signals, not just the integration stage. The study also used a simplified bounded evidence-accumulation model to illustrate possible interactions between microstimulation, reward, and parameters of perceptual decision-making.
The process of myelination, which is the formation of the protective coating around nerve fibers in the nervous system, is a complex and demanding process that requires the activation of the mTORC1 pathway. Researchers have genetically disrupted key inhibitory components upstream of mTORC1, TSC1 or PTEN, to investigate their role in myelination. Surprisingly, hyperactivating mTORC1 activity led to a delay in the onset of developmental myelination, although radial hypermyelination was observed if mTORC1 was hyperactivated after myelination had begun. High mTORC1 activity due to PTEN deletion disrupted SC differentiation, while overactivated PI3K-Akt pathway with PTEN deletion led to the arrest of most SCs at the promyelinating stage, and virtually no myelinated fibers were formed. These findings highlighted the importance of regulating the PI3K-Akt-mTORC1 signaling pathway for myelination.
The study aimed to identify separate brain representations for somatic and vicarious pain using functional neuroimaging combined with multivariate pattern analyses. By identifying dissociable patterns that predict somatic and vicarious pain intensity, the study found separate modifiability of both patterns, with somatotopy located in somatosensory versus mentalizing-related circuits for somatic and vicarious pain, respectively. The study also tested the generalizability of the somatic pain pattern to mechanical and electrical pain, demonstrating the replicability of the somatic/vicarious dissociation. The study suggests possible mechanisms underlying limitations in feeling others’ pain and presents new brain targets for studying pain empathy.
Protein aggregates that cause stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are retained in the mother cell by the ER Stress Surveillance pathway to prevent inheritance of stressed ER. In contrast, normal ER inheritance allows the aggregates to enter daughter cells. Asymmetric cell division generates cells with different properties and ensures that cellular damage is left behind in the mother cell to rejuvenate daughter cells. The ER is a major site for lipid synthesis and storage of intracellular calcium, the folding and modifications of which are critical for the proper functioning of cells. The unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling pathway is a response to ER stress and upregulates the transcription of genes coding for ER chaperones and protein folding components. ER protein aggregates are retained in the mother cell via the mechanism of the lateral ER diffusion barrier established by the septin ring at the bud neck. Incubation in Galactose controls the formation of CPY proteins and identifies ‘class’ cells depending on their size. Cells expressing CPY accumulate in the ER and cause expression of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) pathway. CPY aggregates activate the ERSU pathway which functions to ensure the inheritance of functional cER. Downregulation of the ERSU pathway allows the transmission of the stressed ER into the daughter cell.
The dominance of fleshy algae on coral reefs is causing microbial oxygen consumption to increase, resulting in reef deoxygenation. Heterotrophic bacteria consume 10 times more oxygen in the presence of fleshy algae compared to coral incubations through incomplete carbon oxidation metabolisms. The loss of oxygen through ebullition on algae surfaces exacerbates this problem, with up to 67% of gross benthic oxygen production being lost. As anthropogenic pressures shift reef primary producers globally towards non-calcifying organisms, fleshy algae are gaining competitive advantage over corals through interactions with heterotrophic microbes. The microbialization of reefs is becoming increasingly relevant to reef deoxygenation, causing a feedback loop of coral death and more algae overgrowth. Fleshy macroalgae and microbes remove larger amounts of photosynthetic O2 by ebullition and respiration compared to corals. Heterotrophic microbes found in microbialized reefs have different oxygen consumption rates compared to healthy reefs, causing a decoupling between organic carbon and oxygen consumption rates.
A study published in eLife journal shows how microbes evolve following the acquisition of a new metabolic ability via horizontal gene transfer. Researchers transferred a mobile metabolic pathway into a new host and then used experimental evolution to select for its more efficient use. Scientists investigated dichloromethane (DCM) catabolism in Methylobacterium strains as an example because it holds potential applications in bioremediation and synthetic biology. The team used laboratory evolution to recapitulate the process of transfer and refinement, demonstrating that effective use of an introduced dichloromethane degradation pathway required one of several mutations to the bacterial host that are predicted to increase chloride efflux. They then used this knowledge to identify parallel, beneficial mutations that independently evolved in two natural dichloromethane-degrading strains. Finally, they constructed a synthetic mobile genetic element carrying both the degradation pathway and a chloride exporter, which preempted the adaptive process and directly enabled effective dichloromethane degradation across diverse Methylobacterium environmental isolates.
A panel of BTK inhibitors were tested to uncover the conformational effects on full-length BTK induced by active site inhibitors. The inhibitors were found to fall into two categories, with Ibrutinib and Dasatinib having profound effects on the entire BTK protein, while GDC-0853, CGI1746, and CC-292 did not alter the conformational state of the regulatory domains. A remote Ibrutinib resistance mutation, T316A in the BTK SH2 domain, was found to destabilize the autoinhibitory conformation of full-length BTK, and inhibitor binding was shown to have unanticipated and important long-range allosteric effects that impact protein/ligand interactions. These data provide a framework for developing new strategies to target BTK in the face of acquired drug resistance and reveal significant differences in the overall conformational preferences of full-length BTK bound to distinct small molecule inhibitors.
The inner hair cells in the auditory system are responsible for transducing sound waves into electrical signals that travel along the auditory pathway to the brain. In this study, it was found that in conditions mimicking in vivo, mammalian inner hair cells are intrinsically specialized with low-frequency cells having faster kinetics to follow the phasic component of sound and high-frequency cells encoding sustained, graded responses. The differences in biophysical properties of these cells allow them to accurately encode sound stimuli, providing evidence for the existence of intrinsic filtering in mammalian cochlear inner hair cells. The study also found that the resting membrane potentials, kinetics, and composition of basolateral membrane currents are optimized differently in low- and high-frequency inner hair cells, conferring different characteristics to the electrical signals.
A new study has shown how various epithelial cell types are positioned and maintained in their correct distribution. Epithelial cells are polarised cells that function as barriers between different compartments of multi-cellular organisms, as well as the external environment. As new cells are added through division, it is essential that these diverse types are positioned correctly within the tissue, requiring intermixing of cell lineages, which plays a fundamental role in determining local signaling environments essential for intestinal homeostasis. Researchers used light sheet and confocal imaging to observe live murine small intestinal organoids to define the mechanisms of cell interspersion. They discovered that an elongated shape of the epithelium allowed for cell interspersion during cytokinesis, resulting in a critical modulator of the progeny pattern.
Aurora A (AURKA), a serine/threonine kinase that is overexpressed in epithelial cancers, has been found to impact mitochondrial dynamics and energy production. AURKA is located and imported into mitochondria in human cancer cell lines, and its expression induces mitochondrial fragmentation during interphase, while overexpression enhances mitochondrial fusion and ATP production. AURKA regulates mitochondrial functions and overexpression promotes metabolic reprogramming by increasing mitochondrial interconnectivity. AURKA has been of high interest for pharmaceutical companies as a drug target, but currently available drugs show only modest beneficial effects in patients. Thus, the only promising strategy appears to be the combination of AURKA inhibitors with agents simultaneously targeting multiple cancer-relevant AURKA partners and functions. This knowledge paves the way towards anti-cancer therapeutics based on the simultaneous targeting of mitochondrial functions and AURKA inhibition.
A study has identified how a specific protein kinase controls key cell-cycle transitions in the transmission of malaria through mosquitoes. Scientists have discovered that Ca2+-dependent protein kinase 4 controls three processes in the production of gametes in the mosquito, including the replication of the genome, the assembly of the mitotic spindle, and the activation of the male flagellum. The results reveal for the first time how a kinase can control key cell-cycle transitions during Plasmodium gametogenesis. Malaria is caused by protozoan parasites of the Plasmodium genus, which are borne by mosquitos to humans.
The study found that prevention of relapses is a challenge in treating anxiety disorders and that fear reinstatement can cause relapse despite successful fear reduction through extinction-based exposure therapy. The reinstatement was accompanied by decreased c-Fos expression in the infralimbic cortex with a reduction of synaptic input and enhanced c-Fos expression in the medial subdivision of the central nucleus of the amygdala. The study found that IL dopamine plays a key role in reinstatement, and dopamine-dependent inactivation of the extinction circuits underlies fear reinstatement. The study used a contextual fear-conditioning task in mice and found that IL is a critical brain region for extinction. The study suggests that a dopamine-dependent inactivation of extinction circuits underlies fear reinstatement, and anxiety disorders are often treated with cognitive-behavioral interventions such as exposure therapy. Previous studies have shown that the infralimbic cortex (IL) plays a critical role in extinction. Fear reinstatement occurs through NMDAR- and protein synthesis-dependent neural plasticity, and fear reinstatement requires beta-adrenergic receptor activation, gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor endocytosis, and actin rearrangement in the basolateral amygdala. Reinstatement is common in anxiety disorders, and experimental studies provide more information because of the greater potential for experimental manipulation.
This article reports on the molecular interactions involved in ER-associated mitochondrial division. The study investigates the tethering complex ERMES and the GTPase protein Gem1, showing that they are spatially and functionally linked to ER-associated mitochondrial division. The ERMES complex localizes with a subset of actively replicating mitochondrial nucleoids and helps to distribute mitochondria and facilitate the exchange of lipids between the ER and mitochondria. Gem1 acts as a negative regulator, required for spatial resolution and distribution of newly generated mitochondrial tips following division. The study concludes that ER-associated division serves to link the distribution of mitochondria and mitochondrial nucleoids in cells.
Researchers have discovered a conserved alternative splicing (AS) programme that is differentially regulated in planarian stem cells, according to an&nbsp;article&nbsp;in eLife. Researchers discovered that the functional antagonism between CELF and MBNL factors directly controlled stem cell-specific AS in planarians. The research highlights the importance of AS interactions in stem cell regulation across species. In summary, the study says that while the role of AS in stem cells is poorly understood, RNA splicing is a highly regulated mechanism for controlling ESC biology, and AS adds an extra layer of regulation to the control of gene expression.
The origins of the 2009 A/H1N1 influenza pandemic virus, which caused a global outbreak known as swine flu, have been investigated by scientists. Previous studies indicated that the first human outbreak of the virus occurred in Mexico in early 2009 but no related swine viruses had been found in Mexico or the Americas, so the swine source of the outbreak remained unclear. However, new research has identified swine in Mexico as the source. It highlights that the 2009 pandemic arose from a region not considered a pandemic risk, due to an expansion of influenza A virus diversity in swine resulting from long-distance live swine trade.
Researchers have discovered an enzyme hybrid in Photorhabdus luminescens, a type of bacteria that has both pathogenic and mutualistic qualities. The hybrid is a nonribosomal peptide synthetase-like-pteridine synthase pathway which produces new pteridine metabolites called pepteridine A and B. Using genome synteny analysis to identify a genomic island within the bacterial organism, the study employed extensive gene deletions, pathway-targeted molecular networking, quantitative proteomic analysis, and NMR. The researchers found the hybrid pathway affects the regulation of quorum sensing and secondary metabolic enzymes and expands previous knowledge of the combinatorial biosynthetic potential among bacteria.
The article discusses the role of lipid bilayers in regulating membrane protein oligomerization. The article specifically focuses on the CLC-ec1 Cl-/H+ antiporter and highlights that the lipid solvent defines the dimerization equilibrium of the protein. The article describes how monomers associate to avoid a thinned-membrane defect formed by hydrophobic mismatch at their exposed dimerization interfaces, and dimerization restores the membrane to a near-native state. The article posits that free-energy differentials for local lipid solvation define membrane-protein association equilibria and that preferential lipid solvation is a plausible cellular mechanism for lipid regulation of oligomerization processes. The article further suggests that the lipid compositions of physiological membranes might reflect adaptive mechanisms of regulation of protein structure and function. The article also evaluates the role of protein-induced membrane deformations in explaining the structure and stability of obligate membrane protein complexes and examines the extent of changes in membrane lipid composition necessary to influence these oligomerization reactions. The article concludes that molecular-scale heterogeneity of the lipid bilayer defines membrane protein association equilibria, and molecular-level heterogeneity is essential in defining the role of the lipid solvent in regulating membrane protein oligomerization.
Researchers have developed a potential new treatment for patients with both therapy-sensitive and resistant breast cancer. The drug, called ERX-11, blocks the interaction between key oncogenic coregulator proteins that enable tumour cells to maintain ER signalling, thereby overcoming some of the limitations of current therapies. ERX-11 has demonstrated potent anti-proliferative activity in both in vitro and in vivo models, while remaining orally bioavailable with no signs of toxicity. It interacts directly with ER and block the interaction between a subset of coregulators with both native and mutant forms of ER, potentially offering a new mechanism of action to combat drug resistance.
Researchers have developed a collection of 1200 transgenic zebrafish strains, using the gene-break transposon (GBT) protein trap tool to report and reversibly knockdown tagged genes for a more complete understanding of the vertebrate genome. These GBT constructs encode functional monomeric red fluorescent protein (mRFP) in each of the three reading frames to maximize genome coverage. mRFP expression in cloned GBT lines exhibited novel expression patterns for a population of genes encoding diverse proteins in function and localization, including 64 implicated in human disease. These GBT lines provide a basis for exploring molecular mechanisms of genetic disorders and better understanding normal biology and human disease.
Cells have evolved mechanisms to increase their resistance to subsequent threats after exposure to mild stress, which helps to bypass the limitation of transcriptional response time to environmental challenges. However, the mechanisms responsible for adaptive homeostasis are largely unknown. Researchers used live-cell imaging and microfluidics to investigate the adaptive response of budding yeast to controlled H2O2 stress patterns. The study revealed that the acquisition of tolerance is a systems-level property resulting from nonlinearity of H2O2 scavenging by peroxiredoxins. The study also revealed that this regulatory scheme induces a hormetic effect of extracellular H2O2 stress on replicative longevity. The study provides a novel quantitative framework bridging the molecular architecture of a cellular homeostatic system to the emergence of nonintuitive adaptive properties.
Researchers used quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify changes in the phosphorylation status of presynaptic proteins in resting and stimulated nerve terminals isolated from the brains of Wistar rats. They found changes in the phosphorylation patterns of proteins within the presynaptic active zone, including bassoon, piccolo, and RIM1, and identified activated kinases and phosphatases involved in stimulation. This study provides a foundation for further functional analysis of key phosphosites involved in presynaptic plasticity.
When ribosomes stall during translation, a quality control pathway targets the mRNA and nascent polypeptide chain to prevent potentially harmful consequences. The ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) complex identifies the stalled ribosome and promotes the degradation of the associated nascent polypeptide chain. This degradation pathway uses CAT tails to mediate formation of detergent-insoluble NC aggregates, which suggests that proteins can become specifically marked for aggregation. Stalled ribosomes are rescued by factors that split the subunits, releasing the mRNA and the 40S subunit. The RQC is composed of Ltn1, Rqc1, and Rqc2/Tae2 subunits. Rqc2 first recognizes the stalled 60S and facilitates binding of the Ltn1 E3 ligase, which ubiquitylates the aberrant NC. Next, in a manner dependent on Rqc1, the Cdc48/VCP AAA ATPase and its ubiquitin-binding cofactors are recruited to the complex and facilitate NC delivery to the proteasome for degradation. CATylation and aggregation of NCs could be observed either by inactivating Ltn1, which favors the Rqc2-mediated reaction, or by analyzing NCs with limited ubiquitylation potential. Resistance to ionic detergents is characteristic of ordered fibrillar structures such as the amyloid formed by yeast prions or by expanded polyglutamine tracts. This is the first report of E3 dysfunction leading to formation of aggregates sharing properties with amyloid.
Epithelial fusion is a key process in embryonic development and failure can lead to several birth defects, including neural tube defects. A study using mouse embryos found that cellular protrusions from surface ectodermal cells were required for the completion of neural tube closure. The study also found that Rac1 is necessary for the formation of membrane ruffles in late closure stages, whereas Cdc42 is required for filamentous protrusions in early neurulation. This study contributes to understanding the essential role and molecular regulation of membrane protrusions prior to fusion in mammalian development. Failure of epithelial fusion events can lead to clinically important birth defects including neural tube defects, coloboma, cleft palate, and cardiac septal defects. The study concludes that understanding the mechanisms of the final steps of neurulation is critical for gaining insight into the embryonic pathogenesis of neural tube defects and for the development of improved prevention methods.
The study investigates the spatiotemporal dynamics of Myosin II during Drosophila germ-band extension (GBE), which involves active cell rearrangements driven by planar polarisation of Myosin II. The research develops new computational methods to analyse the process of Myosin II during GBE and finds that enrichment at parasegment boundaries during GBE is independent of Wingless signalling and suggests pair-rule gene control. The study also proposes an updated cell-cell interaction model for Myosin II polarisation and demonstrates that the boundaries defined by the unipolar patterns are the sites of the cell intercalation events driving GBE. These results suggest that polarised cell rearrangements play a crucial role in tissue elongation during development.
A recent study has discovered that recoding by RNA editing is not as rare as previously thought. Using a new bioinformatic approach, researchers found an unprecedented extent of RNA editing in the squid nervous system, identifying 57,108 recoding sites which affect the majority of proteins studied. Recoding is tissue-dependent and enriched in genes with neuronal and cytoskeletal functions, suggesting it plays an important role in brain physiology. This opens up the possibility for extensive recoding in many organisms, rivaling alternative splicing as a means of creating functional diversity. The study measures editing sites that lack a sequenced genome and suggests that extensive recoding is common in many organisms.
Autophagy is a process that allows cells to self-digest damaged proteins and organelles for maintenance of cellular homeostasis. The membrane determinant responsible for initiating the formation of autophagosomes has not been identified, but recent studies suggest a multi-membrane source model for autophagosome biogenesis. Here, the authors established an LC3 lipidation cell-free assay to define the ERGIC as a primary membrane source that is necessary and sufficient to trigger LC3 lipidation in early autophagosome formation, and which is required for autophagosome biogenesis in vivo. Furthermore, they found that the ERGIC recruits ATG14, a critical step for the generation of preautophagosomal membranes. The authors utilized inhibitors of autophagy to verify the physiological relevance of the in vitro reaction, and that LC3 lipidation was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner.
Researchers have identified bip1 (bric à brac interacting protein 1) and Nucleoporin 98 (Nup98) as new components of the equilibrium signalling pathway that maintains blood progenitors within the lymph gland in Drosophila melanogaster. The study used a genetic screen that identified three genes and included misexpression and RNA interference tests. ADGF-A, a secreted enzyme that converts adenosine to inosine, which is required for progenitor cell maintenance, was also found to be a key component in the process. The work aims to clarify how blood cell development is regulated in the lymph gland.
The Human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) immediate early 1 (IE1) protein associates with condensed chromatin of the host cell during mitosis, and its specific interaction with the H2A-H2B acidic patch has been found to impair the compaction of higher-order chromatin structure. Nuclear DNA in eukaryotes is highly packaged into chromatin by histones, with the nucleosome being the basic repeating unit. Nucleosomes connected by linker DNA form a 10-nm array resembling “beads-on-a-string,” which further compacts into a more condensed 30-nm chromatin fiber. The binding of linker histone further compacts the linear array into a more condensed 30-nm chromatin fiber. The interaction between H4 N-terminal tail and the nucleosome acidic patch plays crucial roles in the formation of 30-nm chromatin fiber. IE1 is known to associate with condensed host chromatin during mitosis. The chromatin-tethering domain of IE1 has been found to be responsible for the association with the mitotic chromosome through the acidic patch of the nucleosome. The molecular mechanism underlying the association and the impact on the structure and function of host chromatin by IE1 has been determined. The paper reveals the determinants for the binding specificity of IE1-CTD and histones and analyzes their interactions through isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). The study concludes that the acidic patch of the nucleosome is well known for hosting the binding of several proteins.
MicroRNA-1 (miR-1) is a striated muscle-enriched miRNA that is required for postnatal cardiac function in mice. Most mammalian genomes contain two copies of miR-1, and deletion of either locus causes lethality and cardiac defects in mice. In this study, targeted deletion of miR-1-1 resulted in a similar phenotype to that of miR-1-2 knockout mice, with compound miR-1 knockout mice dying uniformly before weaning due to severe cardiac dysfunction. miR-1-null cardiomyocytes had abnormal sarcomere organization and decreased phosphorylation of the regulatory myosin light chain-2 (MLC2), a critical cytoskeletal regulator. The smooth muscle-restricted inhibitor of MLC2 phosphorylation, Telokin, was ectopically expressed in the myocardium, along with other smooth muscle genes. miR-1 repressed Telokin expression through direct targeting and by repressing its transcriptional regulator, Myocardin. These findings reveal that miR-1 is embedded in an SRF-dependent cardiac gene program that promotes sarcomerogenesis and myogenic differentiation, while simultaneously repressing the smooth muscle program.
The aim of this study was to investigate the cellular mechanisms behind cortico-cortical signaling during goal-directed behavior in the mammalian brain. Specifically, the study recorded the membrane potential of excitatory layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons in the primary somatosensory barrel cortex projecting to either primary motor cortex or secondary somatosensory cortex during a whisker detection task in thirsty mice. The results showed that in well-trained mice, a learning-induced, projection-specific signal from the primary somatosensory cortex to the secondary somatosensory cortex contributed to goal-directed sensorimotor transformation of whisker sensation into licking motor output. The study concludes that goal-directed behavior involves distributed neuronal circuits in the mammalian brain, and these findings shed light on the cellular basis of long-range cortico-cortical signaling during goal-directed behavior.
Mutations in the cohesin complex subunit STAG2 are frequent in many human cancers. Scientists have demonstrated that STAG1, another subunit of the complex, has a strong synthetic lethal interaction with STAG2 in cancer cells, leading to mitotic catastrophe, defective cell division and apoptosis. Blocking STAG1 results in inhibited cancer cell proliferation in STAG2-mutated bladder cancer and Ewing sarcoma cell lines, but not in STAG2 wild-type cancer cells or non-transformed cells. This vulnerability offers an opportunity to develop selective therapeutics for those with STAG2-mutated malignancies.
The impact of transcription start-site (TSS) selection and alternative promoter (AP) usage on translation in response to metabolic energy stress was analyzed in a study using mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Polysomal profiling was combined with quantitative assessment of the 5' ends of mRNAs to identify hundreds of genes with differentially translated APs, particularly following energy stress. The study found that cap-proximal TSS nucleotides had a dramatic effect on translation only upon stress, with eIF4E levels being reduced and its binding to capped-RNAs with different initiating nucleotides found to have the lowest affinity to 5'cytidine. Novel glucose starvation-induced downstream transcripts for the translation regulators eIF4A and Pabp were also identified, which are also translationally-induced despite general translational inhibition. These findings expand the understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that coordinate the cellular response to metabolic energy stress in transcription and translation.
The cerebellum is a key center for motor coordination and cognitive processes. Current theories focus on cerebellar computation from the point of view of its cortical circuitry. However, the interaction between the cerebellar cortex and the cerebellar nuclei (CN) has received less attention. This document presents evidence for an inhibitory nucleo-cortical circuit, the iNC pathway, formed by the glutamatergic neurons of the CN, which send axonal collaterals to the cerebellar granule cell layer. The iNC pathway is likely related to efference copying of motor commands to the cerebellar cortex. The functional significance of the iNC pathway is likely to be amplified by the high divergence of Golgi cells, which target thousands of granule cells, as well as the remarkable mediolateral extent of the iNC axons. The CN might play a key role in the regulation of the information flow through the granule cell layer.
Researchers have used single-molecule FRET to study how the ATPase activity of SWI/SNF-family chromatin remodelers drive the motion of DNA around nucleosomes. They found that the remodeler, RSC, primarily translocates DNA around the nucleosome without substantial displacement of the H2A-H2B dimer and that the translocation of DNA occurs in a stepwise manner, with step size distributions exhibiting a peak at approximately 1-2 base pairs. These findings suggest that the movement of DNA across the nucleosome is likely coupled directly to DNA translocation by the ATPase at its binding site inside the nucleosome. SWI/SNF remodelers are important regulators of chromatin structure in transcriptional activation and in the creation and maintenance of nucleosome-free regions.
The neural mechanisms for controlling pupil response to light remain unclear. Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) are critical in this process, and the study aimed to investigate neural mechanisms for pupil control by monitoring pupil size while manipulating each photoreceptor input or neurotransmitter output of ipRGCs. Results show that transient and sustained pupil responses are mediated by distinct photoreceptors and neurotransmitters. Transient responses use input from rod photoreceptors and output by glutamate, while sustained responses are dominated by non-conventional signaling mechanisms employing melanopsin phototransduction in ipRGCs and output by the neuropeptide PACAP, which provide stable pupil maintenance across the day. These results highlight the temporal switch in coding mechanisms to support proper behavioral dynamics. The study also reveals how ipRGC circuit dynamics in vivo support pupil regulation across time and provides insights into the regulation of other subconscious visual behaviors. 

Circadian transcriptional repressors Cry1 and Cry2 have evolved from bacterial light-activated DNA repair enzymes known as photolyases. While they have lost DNA repair activity, Cry1 and Cry2 now protect genomic integrity by responding to DNA damage through post-translational modification and coordinating downstream transcriptional responses. Cry1 and Cry2 ratio increased during genotoxic stress, suggesting distinct functions following DNA damage. Circadian clock time was shifted by Cry1 phosphorylation and deubiquitination by Herpes virus associated ubiquitin-specific protease (Hausp, also known as Usp7) which stabilizes Cry1. DNA damage increases Cry2 interaction with Fbxl3, destabilizing Cry2. Cry1 and Cry2 protect genomic integrity via coordinated transcriptional regulation involving phosphorylation and ubiquitination. Cry1 and Cry2 also modulate glucose homeostasis and cytokine expression and alter tumor formation rates. Cry-deficient mice are resistant to genotoxic stress in the context of cyclophosphamide treatment. Cry1 and Cry2 retain a residual role in sensing and responding to damaged DNA. Hausp particitates in DNA damage-induced resetting of the circadian clock time by stabilizing Cry1 via deubiquitination. Cry1 stability was decreased in the nucleus after Hausp depletion by shRNA-expressing viruses in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) independent of circadian phase, as expected from the ubiquity of Hausp expression. Treatment of cells with pharmacological inhibitors of Hausp also decreased Cry1 protein, especially in the nucleus. Cry1 and Hausp interact much more strongly than Cry2, and the Cry1 C-Terminus is necessary and sufficient for strong interaction with Hausp.
Scientists have developed a new model system in yeast that can simulate starch biosynthesis and help them understand the relationships between the biosynthetic apparatus, glucan structure and properties. Starch is an important agricultural raw material used for nutritional value and functional properties in various industries. The yeast system has the potential to accelerate starch research and help create a holistic understanding of starch granule biosynthesis, providing a basis for the targeted biotechnological improvement of crops. The study also found that starch is composed of two α-polyglucan components —large moderately-branched amylopectin molecules and interspersing small, near-linear amylose molecules.
Researchers have identified a potential target for controlling infections of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a common pathogen that can be fatal in immune-compromised individuals such as organ transplant recipients. The virus establishes latency in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and is tightly linked to myeloid differentiation. The researchers found that KAP1, a transcriptional co-repressor that is normally associated with heterochromatin formation and gene silencing, is recruited to the viral genome in HCMV latency. The virus can be forced out of latency by KAP1 knockdown or by inducing KAP1 phosphorylation, and this process can be potentiated by activating NF-kB with TNF-α. These findings suggest potential approaches to control HCMV infection and to purge the virus from organ transplants.
The tTARGIT system is a sensitive dual recombinase-activated viral approach that allows for precise manipulation of neural populations that could not be targeted by a single DNA recombinase. The system uses a Flp-dependent tetracycline transactivator 'Driver' adeno-associated virus (AAV) and a Cre-dependent 'Payload' AAV to express a transgene of interest. The tTARGIT system was used to study LepRb neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) and their role in the control of food intake and energy expenditure. The study found that activating LepRbVMH neurons can increase energy expenditure, suppress food intake, and promote weight loss. The tTARGIT system allows for the precise manipulation of previously intractable neural populations with minimal toxicity and is a valuable tool for neuroscience research.
Female mice create long-lasting sensory memories for the pheromones of male mice after mating, which alters neuroendocrine responses to their chemosignals for many weeks. This learning is strongly linked to plasticity in the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB), where chemosignals are encoded by the firing of mitral cells (MCs). In this study, researchers examined the local circuit changes in the AOB caused by pheromonal learning by using targeted ex vivo recordings of mating-activated neurons. They found pronounced reductions in the sensitivity of AOB neurons, which was mediated by changes in intrinsic excitability rather than synaptic strength, suggesting a novel cellular basis for encoding sensory memories. Inhibition in the AOB is stronger in comparison to the main olfactory bulb, and this inhibitory plasticity is one way that female mice can imprint on the pheromones of the stud male after mating. The researchers found that changes in MC responsiveness to pheromones emerged only when they were activated with repetitive patterns, suggesting that after learning the AOB filters repetitive sensory signals from the stud male. Imprinting also increased inhibitory synaptic inputs in MCs and spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic potentials (sEPSPs) in granule cells (GCs). Moreover, mating increased the mean frequency and amplitude of sEPSPs in GCs. These results provide important insights into how social learning affects AOB microcircuits and suggest cell-specific control over AOB output that can modulate reproductive behavior.
The development of ribs in most terrestrial vertebrates involves two skeletal elements - a proximal bone and a distal cartilage portion. While it is known that ribs arise from the somites, little is known about how the two segments are specified. In a study using genetically modified mice and agent-based simulations, it was discovered that proximal-distal patterning and outgrowth could occur based on simple rules. The framework is applicable for understanding the mechanisms of skeletal patterning along a proximal-distal axis. The use of agent-based modeling provides insight into how simple decision making at a cellular level could lead to the emergence of multi-component structures during skeletal development. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling for sclerotome induction and specification.
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) is a widely used technique in scientific research for tracking biological processes in small animal models but is limited to monitoring single processes. A team of researchers has developed a near-infrared dual BLI system by combining stabilized color mutants of firefly luciferase (FLuc) with the luciferin (LH2) analogue infraluciferin (iLH2). The system was validated in a mouse tumor model to monitor both tumor burden and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy. The FLuc-iLH2 reaction leading to near-infrared light emission was analyzed by X-ray crystal structure of FLuc with a high-energy intermediate analogue. The study suggests that combining color modulation of bioluminescence by mutagenesis of the FLuc protein and red-shifting bioluminescence by chemical modification of LH2 allows dual-BLI, making FLuc-iLH2 an ideal dual-BLI approach for researchers.
The human visual system is complex and involves both feedforward and recurrent processes. It is challenging to separate these processes because they overlap in space and time. The study used ultra-rapid serial visual presentation to segregate sustained neural signals, making it possible to disentangle processing steps. The study found that visual processing involves an initial bottom-up sweep followed by a second stage of recurrent processing. Categorical information emerged in the second stage of processing, suggesting that feedback activity is critical for visual awareness and consciousness. The study also found that neural activity became increasingly transient at rapid presentation rates, indicating that less neural resources were used to maintain information.
Researchers have uncovered the mechanisms by which some tuberculosis strains become resistant to antibiotics, by identifying the role of the redox balance in a bacteria's response to certain chemical compounds included in antibiotics. By studying the bacterium grown with clavulanate and amoxicillin, the study identified a transcription factor called WhiB4 that works with specific antibiotic resistance agents to help Mtb fight antibiotic treatment; disruption of WhiB4 enhances resistance, while overexpression of the factor can enhance antibiotic action against drug-resistant Mtb.
Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is a vascular sarcoma that metastasizes early and lacks effective medical therapy. Two gene fusions define EHE: TAZ-CAMTA1 and YAP-TFE3. In a combined proteomic-genetic screen, the Ada2a-containing histone acetyltransferase (ATAC) complex was identified as a key mediator of the oncogenic properties of both fusion proteins. The ATAC complex is an oncogenic driver in cancer and a potential therapeutic target for EHE. Both fusion proteins drive tumorigenesis in vivo and YAP-TFE3 promotes anchorage independent growth. Dysregulation of YAP and TAZ dynamics suggests that YAP-TFE3 is no longer subject to Hippo pathway-mediated suppression.
To eliminate malaria, it is important to understand the contribution of local and cross-border transmission. Traditional surveillance data can be limited in measuring this, so researchers collected parasite genetic data and travel history from thousands of malaria cases across northeastern Namibia and estimated human mobility from mobile phone data. Their results showed strong evidence for local transmission in northern Namibia and extensive evidence of parasite connectivity across hundreds of kilometers within Namibia and across borders with neighboring Angola and Zambia. They suggest that incorporating genetic data into malaria surveillance can provide more accurate information for both local interventions and regional coordination needed to eliminate malaria in this Southern African region.
Exposure to high sugar diets reduces taste sensation and promotes feeding, but it was previously unknown how these peripheral alterations influence eating. This study used the fruit fly D. melanogaster to examine the neural mechanisms behind this phenomenon. The study found that a population of dopaminergic neurons that respond to sweet taste, known as PAM-β’2, had a reduced response to sweet stimuli in animals fed a high sugar diet. The reduced response impaired meal termination, leading to increased feeding rate and satiation. The study suggests that diet-dependent alterations in taste weaken satiation by impairing the central processing of sensory signals.
Microglial dysfunction is a major feature of Alzheimer's disease, but little is known about changes in the microglial proteome during the course of the disease. In this study, the microglial proteome was analyzed in two mouse models of amyloid β pathology to identify Microglial Aβ Response Proteins (MARPs) that reflect the changes that occur during early, middle, and advanced stages of Aβ deposition. The identified MARPs provide a resource for studying molecular targets and potential biomarkers for monitoring AD progression or therapeutic efficacy. The study also found that the differences in the proteomic profiles correlated with the presence of fibrillar Aβ, suggesting that fibrillar Aβ may trigger the AD-associated microglial phenotype and the observed functional decline.
The study explores how perceptual styles - local or global - correlate with pupil size in neuro-typical adults with varying degrees of autistic traits. The experiment involved a dynamic stimulus comprising 150 leftward-moving white dots and 150 rightward-moving black dots which gave the impression of a rotating cylinder. The two surfaces were tagged differently, and participants were asked to either attend to both surfaces or just one during different sessions. The study found that participants with higher scores on the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ) tended to focus more on the front surface, while those with lower AQ scores had more global perceptual styles. Pupil modulation was found to be more prominent in participants with higher AQ scores. The results suggest that pupillometry is a quick and objective way to study inter-individual differences in perceptual style.
A study of gut bacteria clusters in larval zebrafish discovered a family of size distributions that decay approximately as power laws with exponents close to -2. The study found that the spatial organization of gut microbiota influences both microbial abundances and host-microbe interactions. A Yule-Simons-type process was discovered where bacteria grow within clusters and can escape from them, coupled with an aggregation process that tends to condense the system towards a single massive cluster, reminiscent of gel formation. The results show that gut microbiota can be described mathematically as 'living gels', combining the statistical features of evolutionary dynamics with those of soft materials. The study suggests that this family of size distributions appears to be universal across animal hosts, and there are suggestions for testing this prediction in various systems.
The article discusses the evolution and effects of combinatorial regulation in gene regulatory networks, using the phosphate starvation response network in yeast as a model system. The authors analyzed the differences in the regulation of this network in different yeast species, including the model yeast S. cerevisiae and the human commensal yeast C. glabrata. They found that CgPho4, an ortholog of Pho4, is required but Pho2 is dispensable for survival in phosphate starvation in C. glabrata, while both are required in S. cerevisiae. They also found that the dependence of Pho4 on Pho2 has evolved independently in different yeast species, with certain species demonstrating reduced dependence on Pho2. The authors suggest that this evolution of combinatorial regulation can allow for rapid expansion of a gene regulatory network's targets and physiological functions, and is a major source of phenotypic diversity.
A study has identified a link between mutations in the NUDT21 gene and neuropsychiatric disorders. The study found that NUDT21 regulates levels of the MeCP2 protein, which affects the expression of thousands of genes and is important for brain function. The researchers identified eleven individuals with neuropsychiatric disease and copy-number variations spanning NUDT21, and found that elevated NUDT21 increases usage of a particular polyadenylation site in the MECP2 3' UTR, resulting in an enrichment of inefficiently translated long mRNA isoforms. The study's authors argue that NUDT21 may be a novel candidate for intellectual disability and neuropsychiatric disease, and that understanding its role in MeCP2 dysregulation could help to elucidate the mechanism of these conditions.
The article discusses the role of the leucine-zipper protein LUZP1 in regulating cilia formation and function in Townes-Brocks Syndrome (TBS), a rare genetic disease that affects cilia formation in human fibroblasts. The authors demonstrate through proximity labeling and pulldowns that LUZP1 associates with factors linked to centrosome and actin filaments and show that LUZP1 is a cilia regulator. Loss of LUZP1 reduces F-actin levels, increases ciliogenesis, and alters Sonic Hedgehog signaling. The authors suggest that LUZP1 may contribute to the aberrant cilia phenotype in TBS.
The research demonstrates that a protein called LTP informs the brain about dietary lipid composition to regulate insulin signaling. When yeast lipids are present in the diet, free calcium levels rise in Blood Brain Barrier glial cells. This induces transport of LTP across the Blood Brain Barrier by two LDL receptor-related proteins: LRP1 and Megalin. LTP accumulates on specific neurons that connect to cells that produce Insulin-like peptides, and induces their release into the circulation. This increases systemic insulin signaling and the rate of larval development on yeast-containing food compared with a plant-based food of similar nutritional content.
Researchers have discovered a way to use an FDA-approved bile acid sequestrant called cholestyramine as an "anti-antibiotic," which prevents systemically-administered antibiotics from reaching the gut and promoting the evolution and onward transmission of antibiotic resistance. The researchers tested this approach in a mouse model of Enterococcus faecium gastrointestinal tract colonization and found that adjunctive cholestyramine therapy reduced the fecal shedding of daptomycin-resistant E. faecium by up to 80-fold. The researchers hope that this approach could reduce the spread of antibiotic resistance for important hospital pathogens.
Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile genetic fragments that can damage the genome, and epigenetic mechanisms including DNA methylation are used to suppress their movement. However, recent evidence shows that TEs are activated in specific cells and developmental stages, such as the vegetative cell (VC) of pollen grains in flowering plants. Researchers found that about 100 TEs are activated in the VC of Arabidopsis thaliana pollen grains, mostly via DEMETER-catalyzed DNA demethylation. The lack of linker histone H1 in the VC allowed DEMETER to access some of these TEs. Furthermore, ectopically expressed H1 suppressed TEs in VCs by reducing DNA demethylation and via a methylation-independent mechanism. H1 is required for heterochromatin condensation in plant cells and creates heterochromatic foci in the VC progenitor cell. These findings demonstrate that natural depletion of H1 during male gametogenesis facilitates DEMETER-directed DNA demethylation, heterochromatin relaxation, and TE activation in the VC of Arabidopsis thaliana pollen grains.
A study has found that myelination of axons is required to enable the modulation of local circuit synchronization and rapid network oscillations in the brain, and is essential for the functionality of certain neurons responsible for controlling rhythmic activity patterns and computational features of cortical circuits. The research, conducted using toxic and genetic mouse models, found that the loss of compact myelin reduces presynaptic terminals and increases failures, while weak phasic inhibition of specific neurons abolishes optogenetically driven gamma oscillations in vivo. The study also revealed that during behaviors of quiet wakefulness, selectively theta rhythms are amplified and accompanied by highly synchronized interictal epileptic discharges.
The article discusses the regulatory mechanisms governing the RasGRP1 protein, which plays an important role in lymphocyte development and is implicated in certain cancers and autoimmune diseases. The article presents a crystal structure of a fragment of RasGRP1 suggesting that it is maintained in an inactive state until activation signals lead to membrane recruitment and Ras engagement. The article also explores the differences between RasGRP1 and the SOS protein in terms of their regulatory mechanisms, and how this affects ultrasensitive signaling by SOS and graded signaling by RasGRP1.
The document discusses the challenges of studying the metabolism of different cell types within tumors and introduces a new approach based on end-product biomass labeling to overcome these challenges. The authors applied this technique to study the differences between cancer cell and fibroblast metabolism in pancreatic cancer and found that cancer cells use glucose differently than fibroblasts. The authors also infused U-13C-glucose into mice with pancreatic tumors and observed labeling of multiple metabolic intermediates, which suggested that glucose can contribute label to TCA cycle intermediates via pathways that involve pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and pyruvate carboxylase (PC) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumors. However, the relative contribution varies based on plasma glucose levels and the PDAC model examined. Overall, the study demonstrates that the end-product biomass labeling approach can be used to reveal metabolic differences between subpopulations of cells in a mixed cell system and to identify phenotypes that depend on the co-existence of multiple cell types.
Motor skill learning can lead to both increases and decreases in brain activity, making interpretation of learning-related changes difficult. However, a new study shows that motor-skill acquisition is associated with the emergence of highly distinguishable activity patterns for trained movement sequences, in the absence of average activity increases. Trained sequences, classified using functional magnetic resonance imaging, were found to be more reliable than untrained sequences, especially in the supplementary motor area. The study found that the development of specialised neuronal circuits allowed for execution of fast and accurate sequential movements without average increases in brain activity. It is suggested that these maps could be used in future studies to map sequence learning.
This study investigates the mechanism behind lineage segregation of Trophoblast cells (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) during mouse embryonic development. The researchers found that differential Hippo signaling is a key driver of ICM-TE lineage segregation. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, they were able to reveal the temporal dynamics of gene expression during lineage segregation and identify known, as well as novel, markers of the process. The study discovered that quantitative Cdx2-eGFP protein expression is an accurate readout of Hippo signaling activity and thus of the process of ICM-TE specification. The plasticity of both lineages is coincident with their window of sensitivity to Hippo signaling, which dictates the expression of the key factor Cdx2. The study shows that the TE transcriptional profile stabilizes earlier than the ICM and prior to blastocyst formation. The authors also found that the initial segregation of cells is influenced by differences in cell polarity, rather than position per se, as apolar cells have active Hippo signaling and will contribute to the ICM. Overall, this study provides key insights into the dynamics of lineage segregation during embryonic development.
Researchers have discovered that KPNB1, a component of a ribonucleoprotein complex which coordinates transport from the cytoplasm to the nucleus of molecules, can be used as an "integral nuclear transport receptor" for the PER/CRY complex for negative feedback regulation of the circadian clock. The study found that KPNB1 directs nuclear transport of PER/CRY in a circadian fashion and regulates their nuclear entry and repressor function independently of importin α, its classical partner. Loss of KPNB1 resulted in disrupted rhythmic gene expression in human cells and abolished circadian behaviour in flies. The role is evolutionarily conserved across species according to the study published in eLife.
Phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) inhibits protein synthesis, while dephosphorylation of eIF2a at serine 51 restores protein synthesis at the end of the stress response. Two regulatory subunits of a protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) catalytic subunit, PPP1R15A/GADD34 and PPP1R15B/CReP, are required for the dephosphorylation of eIF2a. In vitro studies have shown that a ternary complex consisting of the PP1 catalytic subunit, PPP1R15A/B and G-actin
The article discusses the characterization of PPP1R35 as a new centrosomal protein essential for centriole elongation. The study shows that PPP1R35 is a resident centrosomal protein in the proximal lumen above the cartwheel and is recruited to the nascent daughter centriole early in the duplication cycle. Using quantitative super-resolution microscopy mapping and live-cell imaging, the researchers demonstrate that loss of PPP1R35 function results in decreased centrosome number and shortened centrioles that lack proteins required for centriole elongation. The study also reveals that PPP1R35 acts downstream of and forms a protein complex with RTTN, a microcephaly protein required for distal centriole elongation. The findings provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of centrosome assembly and identify potential therapeutic targets.
The document describes a study that used single-cell FRET measurements in the Escherichia coli chemotaxis system to reveal pervasive signaling variability both across cells in isogenic populations and within individual cells over time. The study quantified cell-to-cell variability of adaptation, ligand response, and steady-state output level, and analyzed the role of network design in shaping this diversity from gene expression noise. The study found that single cells demonstrate strong temporal fluctuations in their signaling, which can arise from stochastic activities of adaptation enzymes or receptor-kinase dynamics. The findings underscore the importance of molecular noise in protein networks in shaping cellular physiology by generating phenotypic diversity and temporal variability. The study provides evidence that the architecture of signaling networks can have a profound influence on their sensitivity to noise-induced protein level differences. The E. coli chemotaxis system provides a compelling experimental paradigm for addressing protein-signaling noise, which FRET microscopy has proven extremely powerful in characterizing. The study concludes that single-cell FRET allows efficient measurement of signaling dynamics within individual bacteria to reveal variability in a wide variety of signaling parameters.
Deleterious mutations in influenza A subtype H3N2's antigenic evolution in humans slow the virus's rate of antigenic evolution and make it more punctuated in nature, according to recent phylogenetic analysis. Influenza evolves antigenically through point mutations in the virus's haemagglutinin (HA) protein that allows immune escape. Sublethal deleterious mutations commonly arise and circulate for long periods of time, therefore affecting influenza A/H3N2's evolutionary patterns, but the impact they have on the population dynamics and long-term evolutionary patterns of this subtype has not been explored. There are three distinct molecular pathways by which antigenic cluster transitions can occur and simulations show that antigenic mutations act in concert with deleterious mutations to reproduce influenza's spindly HA phylogeny, co-circulation of antigenic variants, and high annual attack rates.
The article discusses the potential epigenetic costs associated with assisted reproductive technologies (ART), which have been used to help infertile couples conceive. While most ART-conceived infants seem healthy, studies have reported higher rates of adverse outcomes and abnormalities in such infants. The article reports on a study of pig blastocysts produced in vitro, comparing blastocysts produced with and without reproductive secretions as additives in the culture medium. The study found that using reproductive fluids improved the yield and quality of the blastocysts produced when compared to embryos produced without these additives. The findings suggest that the use of reproductive fluids as additives to culture media for ART may be a promising alternative approach to conceive healthier ART-conceived children.
The interactions between intrinsically disordered proteins play a crucial role in cellular function and are common in all organisms. However, it is still unclear how these protein-protein interactions emerge and evolve on a molecular level. This study used an evolutionary biochemistry approach to track the evolution of two interacting disordered protein domains, CID and NCBD, and found that the CID/NCBD interaction emerged at the beginning of the deuterostome lineage around the Cambrian period. The study suggests that new interactions involving intrinsically disordered proteins may evolve via a low-affinity complex that is optimized by modulating direct interactions as well as dynamics, while tolerating several potentially disruptive mutations. The study sheds light on the evolution of IDPs on a molecular level and contributes to the understanding of the evolution of protein-protein interactions involving intrinsically disordered domains.
The development of distinct neuronal identities is important for the assembly of functional neural circuits in the brain. Intrinsic determinants in neural progenitors are thought to specify their identity and the identity of their neuronal progeny. Researchers investigated the role of orthodenticle in the specification of an identified neuroblast lineage in the Drosophila brain and found that loss of orthodenticle affects molecular properties, neuroanatomical features, and functional inputs of progeny neurons, resulting in a complete transformation of the identity of the neurons. This reveals a surprising capacity for novel circuit formation in the brain and provides a paradigm for large-scale evolutionary modification of circuitry. The study also discusses the role of spatial and temporal cues in generating neuronal diversity within lineages and the molecular mechanisms that confer unique identities to neural progenitors.
A study in eLife magazine reports that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein degradation (ERAD) pathway plays a crucial role in the regulation of sterol biosynthesis, the key element of maintaining cellular membrane function, by controlling the protein levels of Erg1, an enzyme required for a sterol-specific step of the mevalonate pathway. The report indicates that ERAD and HMGR, an enzyme involved in an early and rate-limiting step of the mevalonate pathway, act together to control sterol biosynthesis at different levels, allowing independent regulation of multiple products of the mevalonate pathway.
Planarian flatworms have the remarkable ability to regenerate every organ after amputation, driven by adult pluripotent stem cells, but it is unclear how injury activates and directs stem cells into the appropriate lineages. To study this process, a single-organ regeneration assay was developed in which the planarian pharynx was selectively induced by brief exposure of animals to sodium azide. Using successful feeding as a proxy for regeneration, an RNAi screen of 356 genes upregulated after amputation was conducted to identify genes required for pharynx regeneration. Knockdown of 20 genes inhibited regeneration, and the transcription factor FoxA was found to be required for regrowth of the pharynx. Selective amputation of the pharynx suggests an ancient function for FoxA-dependent transcriptional programs in driving regeneration. The study indicates that stem cells have heterogeneity across the population, with variations in both gene expression and cell cycle status. Furthermore, the pharynx is an excellent model to understand organ regeneration, beginning with pluripotent stem cells that differentiate into distinct cell types, which then integrate with pre-existing tissues to form a functional organ.
The human visual system has the task of recovering different physical sources of optical structure that generate retinal images. While there has been research on how the visual system estimates environmental sources of image structure and blur induced by the eye's limited focal range, little is known about how it distinguishes environmental sources from optical defocus. This article presents evidence that this is a fundamental perceptual problem and provides insights into how and when the visual system succeeds and fails in solving it. The authors show that fully focused surface shading can be misperceived as defocused and that optical blur can be misattributed to the material properties and shape of surfaces. The article suggests that photogeometric cues along smooth self-occlusions and planar cuts of 1D luminance profiles provide information that predicts when identical luminance gradients are perceived as surface shading of 3D surfaces.
Defects in the assembly of mitochondrial iron-sulfur (Fe/S) proteins, which are involved in various biological processes, can lead to rare diseases. A study has characterized two mitochondrial proteins, Bol1 and Bol3, as specific factors involved in the assembly of [4Fe-4S] clusters in a subset of mitochondrial proteins. Bol1 and Bol3 form dimeric complexes with monothiol glutaredoxin Grx5 and Nfu1, but cannot replace Nfu1, and their findings provide an explanation for the pathological phenotypes of patients with mutations in BOLA3. The role of the Bol proteins in cellular iron regulation, cellular enzyme activities for key mitochondrial proteins in yeast cells, and mitochondrial fractionation were also investigated.
Protein S-palmitoylation is the process of attaching the 16-carbon fatty acid palmitate to cysteine residues in proteins, which is important for protein localization and signaling. Acyl-protein thioesterases APT1 and APT2 are known to remove palmitate from cytosolic cysteine residues, but it is unclear if there are other depalmitoylase enzymes. In a dual pulse-chase strategy, researchers found that knockdown or inhibition of APT1 and APT2 blocked depalmitoylation of Huntingtin, but did not affect palmitate turnover on postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD95) or N-Ras. Activity profiling identified novel serine hydrolase targets of the APT1/2 inhibitor Palmostatin B, which included a family of uncharacterized ABHD17 proteins that accelerate palmitate turnover on PSD95 and N-R
The Notch signaling pathway plays a role in regulating cell fate during development in organs including the lung. Jagged or Delta-like ligands collectively or individually influence differentiation of airway epithelial progenitors. Using mouse genetic models, major differences in Jagged and Delta-like ligands are shown in the regulation and establishment of cell fate. Jagged ligands had a major impact in balancing distinct cell populations in conducting airways, but had no role in the establishment of domains and cellular abundance in the neuroendocrine microenvironment. Delta-like ligands were crucial in restricting cell fate and size of neuroendocrine bodies and showed an overlapping role with Jagged in differentiation of NE-associated secretory cells. The Jag and Delta-like ligands differ in their expression patterns and timing during airway progenitor cell differentiation. Jag1 is the predominant ligand mediating secretory versus multiciliated cell fate choice during differentiation in intrapulmonary airways, while Jag2 predominantly contributes to the balance of basal versus luminal cells in extrapulmonary airways. These mechanisms may potentially play a role in human conditions that result in aberrant NE differentiation, including NE hyperplasias and cancer.
A study has examined the assembly of PDZ domain scaffold proteins, which are molecular modules that orchestrate cellular signalling in space and time. Using a unique experimental setup that enables direct access to the intracellular face of the cell membrane, the researchers investigated how multivalent protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions provide critical avidity for the strong binding between PICK1 and PSD-95 PDZ scaffolds and their cognate transmembrane binding partners. The binding kinetics were found to be remarkably slow, and binding strength was two to three orders of magnitude higher than the intrinsic affinity for isolated PDZ interaction. Discrete changes in the intrinsic PICK1 PDZ affinity did not affect overall binding strength but instead revealed dual scaffold modes for PICK1. The study shows that the intrinsic PDZ domain affinities are finely tuned and encode specific cellular responses, enabling multiplexed cellular functions of PDZ scaffolds.
A study published in the journal eLife has found that the relationship between orientation preference (OP) and ocular dominance (OD) maps in the brain can be modified by sensory input from the environment, demonstrating a previously unknown level of neuroplasticity in response to sensory input. Pinwheels in OP maps, where domains representing all orientations meet at a point, have previously tended to lie close to the center of OD regions, demonstrating an extremely strong spatial relationship between them. In previous experiments, none of the manipulations have succeeded in modifying the overall spatial relationships between OD and OP maps, until this study. Computational modelling predicted that biasing the visual input towards orthogonal orientation in the two eyes should cause a shift of OP pinwheels towards the border of OD columns. The prediction was confirmed by raising cats with orthogonally oriented cylindrical lenses placed over each eye from the age of 3 weeks. From age 20 weeks, the researchers used imaging to map OP and OD preferences in cortical areas of cross-reared and control animals. Results showed that cross-rearing caused a systematic change in the distribution of preferred orientation of single units in the cross-reared animals.

Researchers have discovered that inhibiting the phosphorylation of a transcription factor called Atonal homologue 1 (Atoh1) on tyrosine 78, which they found is required for the development of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-type medulloblastoma in mice, is an effective therapy for medulloblastoma. Treatment options for this common brain tumour in children are currently limited to surgery, radiation and traditional chemotherapy. Inhibiting Jak2-mediated tyrosine 78 phosphorylation reduces tumour occurrence and prolongs survival in mice. Jak2 interacts with Atoh1 and phosphorylates it on tyrosine 78, stabilising Atoh1 and thus augmenting the proliferation of tumour-initiating cells in medulloblastoma. Targeting Atoh1 by inhibiting the phosphorylation on tyrosine 78 presents a viable avenue for targeting medulloblastoma cells without impinging on healthy brain tissue.
This study investigated how neuronal excitability is regulated under varying environmental conditions. The researchers found that the gene pickpocket 29 (ppk29), which encodes a sodium channel, regulates neuronal excitability via a protein-independent mechanism involving the mRNA of the seizure (sei) gene. The two genes are convergently transcribed on opposite DNA strands, and have complementary 3′ untranslated regions that overlap. The authors suggest that ppk29 mRNA could regulate sei mRNA levels by acting as a natural antisense transcript (NAT). The study found that when animals adapted to high temperatures (37°C), the transcript levels of sei went up and ppk29 went down relative to their levels at 25°C, indicating that sei and ppk29 play opposite roles in the regulation of neuronal activity in response to changes in ambient temperature. Flies carrying independent insertional alleles of ppk29 demonstrated protection from the effects of heat stress relative to wild type and sei mutant animals. The study found that the spontaneous neuronal activity of larval motor neurons is not different between ppk29, sei, and wild type animals at 25°C, but at 38°C, wild type neurons show a small but significant increase in neuronal activity, while sei mutant neurons become hyperexcitable. In contrast to sei null and wild type animals, ppk29 mutants are unable to increase neuronal firing rates.
Sperm selection and elimination in the female reproductive tract are crucial for successful fertilization, and the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved are not fully understood. Capacitation, a physiological process that enables sperm to fertilize an egg, occurs naturally in the oviduct of mammals. Recent studies show that the CatSper calcium channel complexes, which are pivotal for sperm migration, undergo molecular changes and specific modifications during capacitation. Specifically, CatSper1, a pore subunit, is found to be an O-linked glycosylated protein that undergoes capacitation-induced processing dependent on calcium and phosphorylation cascades. These processing changes correlate with protein tyrosine phosphorylation (pY) development, and they play a role in sperm selection and maintenance of fertilizing capacity in the female tract. The presence and integrity of CatSper nanodomains correlate with sperm hyperactivation, and these nanodomains are associated with cholesterol-rich microdomains. Capacitation-induced proteolytic activity targeting CatSper1 involves protein phosphorylation cascades and calcium influx, and it results in CatSper1 cleavage and degradation. The protease(s) responsible for this activity is not localized inside the CatSper nanodomains, but rather associated with the flagellar membrane. Capacitation generates a heterogeneous sperm population in which intact CatSper1 and pY development are inversely correlated at the single cell level. These heterogeneous sperm cells in vitro might reflect a collection of the time- and space-dependent changes that sperm undergo in the female tract. Finally, in vivo imaging studies of spatially distributed sperm populations and ANN-based automatic detection of sperm distributed along the cleared female tract reveal that the molecular characteristics of sperm change segment-specifically along the oviduct, reinforcing the idea that capacitation is a dynamic process with regional heterogeneity in the female tract.
Lipid droplets (LDs) are organelles that store neutral lipids and are important for energy storage and membrane synthesis. The Arf1/COPI protein machinery, known for its role in vesicle trafficking, regulates LD morphology, protein targeting to LDs, and lipolysis, but its mechanisms were unclear. Recent evidence shows that Arf1/COPI can bud nano-LDs from phospholipid-covered oil/water interfaces in vitro. This study shows that Arf1/COPI proteins localize to cellular LDs, are sufficient to bud nano-LDs from cellular LDs, and are required for targeting specific triacylglycerol (TG)-synthesis enzymes to LD surfaces. Cells lacking Arf1/COPI function have increased amounts of phospholipids on LDs, resulting in decreased LD surface tension and impairment to form bridges to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The study uncovers a function for Arf1/COPI proteins at LDs and suggests a model in which Arf1/COPI machinery acts to control ER-LD connections for localization of key enzymes of TG storage and catabolism.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is responsible for folding and maturation of many proteins in eukaryotic cells, making it essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Misfolded proteins can be toxic and lead to disease, and so cells have evolved quality control mechanisms to monitor and remove these faulty proteins. One of the main degradation processes is called ER-phagy, a form of selective autophagy, which involves the removal of certain regions of the ER through interaction with cargo receptors and their subsequent incorporation into autophagosomes for degradation and recycling. Despite the emerging links between ER-phagy and core ER quality control pathways, the degree to which other branches of ER-quality control mechanisms employ ER-phagy is largely unknown. In this study, a highly conserved cytosolic protein called C53 was identified that forms a tripartite receptor complex with the ufmylation ligase UFL1 and its membrane adaptor DDRGK1. This receptor complex bridges selective autophagy with ribosome-associated quality control in the ER and is activated by stalled ribosomes during co-translational protein translocation, leading to the degradation of specific ER proteins. Interestingly, C53 interacts with plant and mammalian ATG8 isoforms via a non-canonical ATG8 interacting motif (AIM), termed shuffled AIM (sAIM), which is necessary for mediating ATG8 binding. Overall, this study sheds light on a new mechanism for maintaining proteostasis in the ER and highlights the importance of autophagy in the regulation of ER-quality control.
A recent study published in eLife has analyzed how the neurons in the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) of animals such as Drosophila, mice, and humans achieve bi-directional plasticity, and what the molecular and cellular mechanisms behind it are. In their analysis, the researchers found that homeostatic potentiation and depression use distinct molecular mechanisms, with homeostatic depression being achieved by decreased presynaptic calcium channel abundance and calcium influx, completely independently of the presynaptic action potential waveform. Ultimately, the findings suggest that the concurrent expression of two independent homeostatic signalling systems may achieve effective bi-directional control of muscle excitation, ultimately stabilizing neural function throughout the life of an organism.
HIV encodes Tat, a protein that facilitates viral transcription by binding to nascent viral pre-messenger RNAs. This protein modulates cellular transcription in target immune cells also, but the targets and molecular mechanisms are not clear. Tat reprograms target immune cells to promote viral replication and rewires pathways beneficial for the virus using master transcriptional regulators bound at promoters and enhancers. Tat controls both the initiation and elongation steps in target genes through RNA polymerase II recruitment and pause release. Tat uses regulatory mechanisms to occupy precise genomic domains (promoters and enhancers) to reprogram cellular transcription using unexpected mechanisms. Tat targets genes with shared functional annotations that are regulated by common master transcriptional regulators such as T-cell identity factors. Tat is capable of altering cellular gene expression via association with factors bound to promoters. Tat down-regulates genes that blunt immune system responses, nucleic acid biogenesis (splicing and translation), and proteasome control. Tat functions as both activator and repressor by modulating Pol II recruitment and/or pause release as well as controlling the activity of chromatin-modifying enzymes to reprogram the epigenetic landscape of the host cell.
The article discusses the use of the ascidian embryo as a model for studying cell position determination during embryogenesis. The study found that planar cell divisions in ascidian embryos follow an invariant cleavage pattern between ectoderm and endomesoderm, and that the alignment of spindles in every cell tends to align at metaphase in the long length of the apical surface except in cells undergoing unequal cleavage. The article also discusses the importance of cell division plane orientation for pattern formation, and the impact of mitotic cell rounding and cell cycle asynchrony on mitotic spindle orientation in cells of the ascidian blastula. Finally, the article identifies cells undergoing oriented cell divisions (OCD) in the ascidian embryo and the implications for planar cell division and morphogenesis.
Researchers have discovered a neuronal mechanism that regulates the increase of germline stem cells (GSCs) in female fruit flies in response to mating. The study found that efferent octopaminergic neurons projecting to the ovary are essential for mating-induced GSC increase as they relay the mating signal from sex peptide receptor-positive cholinergic neurons. The neuronal activity of the octopaminergic neurons is required for mating-induced GSC increase via intracellular Ca2+ signaling. Octopamine and its receptor Oamb are also required for mating-induced GSC increase. The study highlights how neuronal signaling can regulate stem cell behavior in response to environmental cues.
Researchers have used 3D electron microscopy to discover a network of microtubules that link the kinetochore fibers (K-fibers) of the mitotic spindle. They found that these microtubules, known as the mesh, were connected to multiple MTs within the fiber and provided optimal stabilization required for normal progression through mitosis. Using semi-automated segmentation techniques, they discovered three types of connectors in the mesh – bipolar, tripolar and quadrupolar – which had heterogenous volumes and contacts with MTs. The discovery of the mesh as a key integrator and determinant of K-fiber structure and function could help with the development of cancer treatments to disrupt mitosis in cancerous cells.  
The study examines the genomic control of cell behavior in multi-ciliated epithelial cells (MCCs), a cell type that plays a critical role in the development and homeostasis of various organs in the human body. By investigating the cilia-associated transcription factor Rfx2, the study aims to define the program linking gene expression to cell biological processes in MCCs. Through a combination of high-throughput sequencing, systematic mapping of Rfx2 chromosomal binding sites, and functional protein interactions, the study reveals Rfx2 activates a complex program of gene expression that regulates multiple features of MCCs. These features include cell migration, ciliogenesis, and cilia function. The study also discovers an unexpected role for Rfx2 in controlling cell movement in newborn MCCs. The study provides insights into the mechanisms that control differential gene expression in cell behavior and serves as a paradigm for understanding genomic control of cell biological processes.
A new study reports a strategy for inducing regenerative response in appendages across three species that span the animal phylogeny. The researchers found that the frequency of appendage regeneration in moon jellyfish Aurelia can be increased by feeding with the amino acid L-leucine and the growth hormone insulin. Insects and mammals also showed limb regeneration potential upon the administration of these energy supplements. The simplicity with which nutrient supplementation can induce appendage regeneration provides a testable hypothesis across vertebrates. The study focuses on how limbs can be made to regenerate in animals that do not normally show limb regeneration. The authors demonstrate that nutrient supplementation can induce regenerative response in appendage and limb across three vastly divergent species. The authors identified a necessary condition, which is water current, and modulated it by feeding, insulin, and hypoxia, leading to arm regeneration in Aurelia that was observed in the natural habitat.
DNA polymerase θ (Polθ) is a specialized polymerase that is involved in DNA damage tolerance, including repairing double-strand breaks (DSBs) by microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ) or alternative end-joining (alt-EJ). Polθ is known to promote non-templated (random) nucleotide insertions during alt-EJ, but lacks template-independent terminal transferase activity in vitro, leaving a paradox in our understanding of the enzyme's functions. In this study, the authors discover that Polθ oscillates between three different modes of terminal transferase activity, including non-templated extension, templated extension in cis, and templated extension in trans, during alt-EJ, allowing for random combinations of templated and non-templated nucleotide insertions. This switching mechanism requires manganese as a co-factor and is most efficient on DNA containing 3’ overhangs. The authors also find that Polθ terminal transferase activity is more proficient than terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase. This study provides new insights into the enzymatic functions of Polθ and how it generates genetic diversity during alt-EJ to contribute to genome instability.
Zolpidem has been shown to paradoxically recover speech, cognitive, and motor functions in select subjects with severe brain injury but the mechanisms behind this effect are unknown. This study identifies a distinctive pattern of EEG dynamics in three diverse patients with known zolpidem responses, which suggests a mechanistic model. In the absence of zolpidem, all subjects show a strong low frequency oscillatory peak, while zolpidem administration sharply reduces EEG power and coherence at low frequencies. The activation by zolpidem is proposed to arise from a combination of direct drug effects on cortical, striatal, and thalamic populations and further activation of underactive brain regions induced by restoration of cognitively-mediated behaviors. Behavioral improvement spans from limited signs of conscious awareness to recovery of conversant language, ambulation and coordinated motor activity within an hour of administration of the medication. The study provides a unifying biological mechanism accounting for the observed dynamical features of the resting brain state and the changes in brain dynamics linked with zolpidem-induced behavioral facilitation.
Marine cyanobacteria and algae possess distinctive metabolomes, with much under-explored potential. The diversity and distribution of natural products in these organisms were evaluated by extracting and digitizing an established marine cyanobacteria and algae collection, and analyzing the data by comparing against available data sets. Multivariate analyses and molecular networking were conducted, with the findings revealing the marine samples to be more similar to freshwater cyanobacteria than other datasets, and only 13.7% of the marine samples' molecular features overlapped with other datasets. Using fraction libraries to reduce sample complexity and increase the titer of minor constituents, particular chemical scaffolds were identified that were more diverse in their structural variations and more abundant in the collections. This study demonstrates the use of inventories as a tool to explore the diversity and distribution of natural products, with possible implications for medicine, personal health care, cosmetics, biotechnology, and agriculture.
The study focused on the use of a biosensor to determine whether the regulatory axis of oncogenic stress and tumor suppression by p53 is conserved in Drosophila. Results showed that Drosophila p53 is actively used in gonadal stem cells after exposure to stressors that destabilize the genome. Additionally, p53 activity was required for the recovery of fertility after stress and cellular entry into the cell cycle was delayed in p53- stem cells. The findings establish that the stem cell compartment of the Drosophila germline is selectively licensed for stress-induced activation of the p53 regulatory network. Furthermore, the study discovered ancestral links between p53 and aberrant proliferation that are independent of DNA breaks and predate the evolution of the ARF/Mdm2 axis.
A study has revealed new insights into the evolution of parasitic organisms in the phylum Apicomplexa, which includes human pathogens such as Plasmodium. The research involved generating single-cell transcriptomes for all major apicomplexan groups lacking large-scale sequence data, and phylogenetic analysis, which revealed that apicomplexan-like parasites are polyphyletic and that their similar morphologies emerged convergently at least three times. The study also discovered plastids in deep-branching apicomplexans are common and contain some of the most divergent and AT-rich genomes ever found. Plastids in apicomplexans and their relatives are widespread and share a common, photosynthetic origin.  The analysis used individual cells of parasites to generate transcriptomes from all major apicomplexan groups that currently lacked large-scale transcriptomic or genomic data.
Glucose starvation triggers the disassembly of the Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 (TORC1) in eukaryotic cells, with one of its key components, Kog1/Raptor, moving to a single body on the edge of the vacuole, reveals a report in the eLife Sciences Journal. The report explains that, together, TORC1 controls the growth and metabolism of eukaryotes, but its fate when subjected to glucose starvation until now has been unknown, leading scientists to examine the localisation of TORC1 and Kog1 in glucose starvation and other conditions, leading to the following discovery. Surprisingly, glucose starvation leads to disassembly of the TOR complex and movement of Kog1 from the vacuolar membrane to a single body on the edge of the vacuole, while glucose repletion leads to a reversal of this process.

Macrophage activation, which is essential for their diverse functions depending on tissue state, is affected by metabolic shifts. The M2 or alternative activation of macrophages is triggered by IL-4 and IL-13, which leads to transcriptional upregulation of genes coordinating fibrosis, tissue remodeling, and Type 2 inflammation. M2 activation is associated with distinct metabolic shifts, including beta-oxidation and glutamine consumption. The Akt-mTORC1 pathway is essential for selective control of M2 activation by regulation of enzyme Acly, which results in increased histone acetylation and M2 gene induction. The metabolic shift fuels production of UDP-GlcNAC, a substrate for glycosylation of some M2 markers. Akt mediates enhanced glucose consumption in M2 macrophages, which contributes to induction of M2 gene expression. The IL-4 signaling activates Jak-Stat and Akt-mTORC1 pathways independently, with Akt regulating the inducible histone acetylation of some M2 genes but not beta-oxidation in M2 macrophages.
A study using zebrafish found that social isolation reduced social preference in juvenile fish and caused disruption in neural activity in brain areas linked to social behavior, social cue processing, and anxiety/stress. Buspirone, a 5HT1A receptor agonist, was found to rescue social preference behavior in isolated fish by reducing serotonin levels. The study also found that even brief periods of social isolation can impact mental and physical health. The study compared full and partial social isolation and found that both caused a significant decrease in social preference relative to normally raised sibling controls. Isolated fish also exhibited prolonged periods of quiescence (freezing), which is a hallmark of anxiety-like behavior. The study used whole-brain two-photon imaging to investigate brain activity patterns in response to social cues and found that the caudal hypothalamus and preoptic area were crucial in regulating social preference. Anti-social isolated fish exhibited a completely different activity profile than their anti-social sibling controls, while pro-social isolated fish showed a similar activation pattern to pro-social controls in the caudal hypothalamus but increased activity in the dorsal preoptic area.
Researchers used miniature cameras and an inertial measurement unit to measure the eye and head movements of mice while they performed prey-capture behavior. They found that eye movements in mice are primarily compensatory for head movements, stabilizing visual scenes while in motion. However, non-compensatory saccades are also present and do not preferentially target prey. Instead, orienting movements are driven by the head with the eyes following in coordination to sequentially stabilize and recenter the gaze. The study provides insight into how mice actively acquire visual information during ethological behaviors and how they regulate their gaze to achieve visually mediated goals.
Prdm14, a transcriptional regulator of embryonic stem cells that also plays a key role in primordial germ cell formation, exerts its repressive effects in part through the protein Mtgr1. The two proteins co-occupy the genomic targets of mouse embryonic stem cells, and their interaction plays a central role in the mouse germ regulatory network. Researchers have used synthetic binding proteins called monobodies to facilitate crystallisation and structure determination of the Prdm14-Mtgr1 complex, or as an inhibitor of the Prdm14-Mtgr1 interaction. Work to identify other molecular players important for Prdm14's function continues.

Plants have adapted to coordinate their physiology and phenology with seasonal changes in the environment through photoperiodic responses that are regulated by the circadian clock and light perception pathways. A new protein called PCH1 has been identified that integrates the clock with light perception pathways and regulates photoperiod-responsive growth. PCH1 associates with both circadian clock and photoreceptor components, peaks at dusk, binds phytochrome B in a red light-dependent manner, and regulates light-responsive gene expression. PCH1 stabilizes phyB-containing photobodies in the evening, prolonging red-light signaling after prior light exposure, helping to suppress hypocotyl growth in short-day conditions.
A recent study has identified an important enzyme, Mm_bGlc17, in the gut of the common cockchafer larva, that metabolizes taraxinic acid β-D-glucopyranosyl ester (TA-G), a sesquiterpene lactone found in the common dandelion, Taraxacum officinale. The research shows that Mm_bGlc17 reduces TA-G toxicity and is necessary for the preference of M. melolontha larvae for TA-G-deficient plants. The study illustrates the role of insect digestive enzymes in plant-herbivore interactions and the multifaceted roles of these enzymes in not just digestion but also protection against toxic secondary metabolites produced by plants.
The study investigates the relationship between Alzheimer's disease and the formation and function of neuromuscular junctions (NMJ). The study reveals that amyloid precursor protein (APP) interacts with LRP4, an obligatory co-receptor for muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK), which is required for normal formation and function of the NMJ. The ligand for LRP4, agrin, also binds to APP and enhances its interaction with LRP4. The study shows that APP regulates NMJ formation through interaction with LRP4 and agrin. The study also highlights the important role of ApoE receptors in the development of NMJ, particularly LRP4. The study uses mutant mice to identify the domains of LRP4 that are required for NMJ development. The study shows that LRP4 membrane anchoring is required for the growth and maturation of the NMJ, while its intracellular domain is not necessary. The findings provide insights into the molecular mechanisms that govern NMJ formation and maintenance.
Olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) detect odorants and transmit information to the brain through the activation of olfactory receptors. The abundance of different receptor types is highly heterogeneous, with some types being significantly more prevalent than others. The authors propose a model that accounts for the optimal distribution of olfactory receptors, suggesting that it is tuned to maximize information about odors in a regime of efficient coding that is sensitive to the global context of correlated sensor responses. The authors suggest that receptor abundances in mammals should continuously adapt to odor statistics. The model predicts that increasing exposure to odorants can lead to increased, decreased, or unchanged abundances of different activated receptors, and the diversity of these effects is required for efficient coding. Finally, the authors provide simple dynamical rules for neural birth and death processes that might underlie this adaptation.
The document reports a study on the mechanism of protein-protein association using physics-based energy functions to sample the conformational space. The study captures both specific and non-specific encounter complexes, and shows that proteins tend to associate along preferred pathways. The paper uses a detailed all-atom model to map the energy surface of the association and shows that the ligand tends to move into a restrictive subspace. The study focuses on the association between the N-terminal domain of Enzyme I and the histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein (HPr). Results show good agreement with experimental data obtained from Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) techniques. The study uses a docking program called PIPER to generate encounter complexes, and the results suggest that the energy function used in the study is valid beyond selecting the native structure of the complex.
The γ-secretase subunit APH1B and Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) have been implicated as genetic risk factors for schizophrenia, and studies show that APH1B is selectively involved in NRG1 intracellular signalling. Loss of function mutations in either gene in rodents cause schizophrenia-like deficits. This study shows that Aph1b-deficient mice have a decrease in excitatory synaptic markers, and require Aph1b for excitatory synaptic transmission and plasticity. NRG1 intracellular signalling downstream of Aph1b-γ-secretase complexes is found to promote the formation of excitatory connections in cortical neurons, and this study provides insight into the importance of Nrg1 intracellular signalling in the establishment of functional synapses and the potential role of misprocessing of NRG1 in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
Researchers identified the developmental
The H2A.Z histone variant is known to be a significant marker of gene promoters and other regulatory elements in chromatin. Previous research on this field revealed that the chromatin remodeler SWR1 mediates the site-specific incorporation of H2A.Z in eukaryotic chromatin. This recent research discovers that SWR1 interacts with and recognizes key residues within the alpha2 helix of nucleosomal H2A, an area previously unknown to influence remodeler activity. Additionally, the study reveals that SWR1 preferentially interacts with nucleosomal DNA at superhelix location 2 on the nucleosome face away from its linker-binding site. The research concludes that close contact between SWR1 and nucleosomal DNA around SHL2 is critical for enzyme activation.
The study analyzes the locomotion of fruit flies and shows that it can be well-described by a Hierarchical Hidden Markov Model (HHMM). The HHMM shows that a fly's locomotion can be broken down into a few locomotor features, and odors modulate locomotion by changing the time a fly spends performing different locomotor features. The behavior of individual flies is best understood as being grouped into at least three to five distinct clusters, rather than variations around an average fly. The lack of a model for locomotion makes it difficult to quantify the effect of stimuli on locomotion and is a critical missing piece in understanding the underlying sensorimotor transformations. The HMM architecture is shown in Figure 1D, and the modeling of the dataset is based on an ad-hoc parametrization of locomotion. Surprisingly, different flies employ different strategies in their locomotion both before odor onset and in response to odors.
The study investigates whether the bilateral representation of upper limb movements differs between the left and right hemispheres. Using intracranial recordings, the study compares the cortical overlap for ipsilateral and contralateral limb movements in the left and right hemispheres. The results show stronger bilateral encoding in the left hemisphere, with more extensive bilateral encoding observed in the premotor and parietal regions. Additionally, the study demonstrates that the ipsilateral cortical representation differs between the left and right hemispheres, and that this difference is dependent on the task phase.
Researchers have created a transgenic mouse model expressing a photoactivated adenylyl cyclase (bPAC) in sperm. This allows the researchers to mimic the action of the endogenous soluble adenylyl cyclase (SACY) that is required for motility and fertilization by rapidly elevating cAMP via light-stimulation, which accelerates the flagellar beat and, thereby, changes the swimming behaviour of sperm. Furthermore, bPAC replaces endogenous adenylyl cyclase activity. In mutant sperm lacking the bicarbonate-stimulated SACY activity, bPAC restores motility after light-stimulation and, thereby, enables sperm to fertilize oocytes in vitro. The study shows that optogenetic control of cAMP in vivo allows researchers to non-invasively study cAMP signaling and control behaviors of single cells. The researchers engineered a targeting vector to express the beta subunit of photoactivated adenylyl cyclase from the soil bacterium Beggiatoa (bPAC) under the control of the protamine 1 promoter (Prm1), which is exclusively active in post-meiotic spermatids. The cAMP increase due to light-stimulation also results in sperm capacitation, and bPAC functionally mimics the activation of SACY by HCO3-. Finally, an increase of cAMP levels by light does not elevate Ca2+ levels in sperm.
The cohesin complex is a ring-shaped protein complex that plays a critical role in higher-order chromosome organization, holding together replicated sister chromatids and ensuring their faithful segregation. The complex promotes sister chromatid cohesion by topologically entrapping two sister DNAs, and it also extrudes DNA loops that reflect chromatin domain formation. The mechanism by which the cohesin complex interacts with DNA and establishes interactions between more than one DNA is not fully understood. However, a recent study proposes a structure-based model for the cohesin complex that explains both topological entry into the cohesin ring and DNA loop extrusion. The model shows that ATP and DNA binding promote conformational changes in the cohesin complex, leading to the gripping state of DNA. Two DNA binding modules, associated with cohesin's heads and hinge, are juxtaposed in the gripping state. Disassembly of the gripping state triggers unidirectional hinge module movement, which completes topological DNA entry by directing DNA through the ATPase head gate. If head gate passage fails, hinge module motion creates a Brownian ratchet that drives loop extrusion by biased Brownian motion. This model has important implications for chromosomal cohesin function and extends to asymmetric and symmetric loop extrusion, as well as z-loop formation.
Perceptual learning, the process in which observers improve their discrimination of fine differences of basic visual features through practice, is often specific to the orientation and retinal location of the trained stimulus. Previous explanations for this specificity have focused on neural plasticity in early visual areas or improved readout of inputs from these areas. However, new research suggests that learning specificity is related to the untrained conditions, as the visual neurons representing these conditions are not bottom-up stimulated nor top-down attended during training. Therefore, high-level perceptual learning may not be able to functionally connect to these neurons for learning transfer. To enable transfer, bottom-up or top-down stimulation of the untrained conditions are necessary. These findings suggest that visual perceptual learning is mainly a high-level rule-based learning process that occurs beyond the retinotopic and orientation-selective visual areas.
The study aimed to investigate the mechanisms underlying the capacity to remember temporal relationships between events, a crucial component of episodic memory. Using time-lapse imaging of thousands of neurons in mice over several weeks, the study found evidence of ongoing evolution of episodic representations despite stable place field locations and constant remapping between two distinct environments. The hippocampal ensemble dynamics appear to support the formation of a mental timeline in which experienced events can be mnemonically associated or dissociated based on their temporal distance. The study involved five male mice aged 8-12 weeks that underwent two surgical procedures to inject viral vectors and implant an optical guide tube. Mice were trained to run back and forth on two elevated linear tracks, and imaging was performed every other day for 15 days, making for 8 recording days. The study found that days-scale hippocampal ensemble dynamics could support the formation of a mental timeline, an essential component of episodic memory.
Scientists have discovered how human cells ensure equal distribution of chromosomes between the two daughter cells during cell division. They found that the spindle assembly checkpoint enables centering of the metaphase plate by providing time for correction of asymmetrical positioning so that cell division is symmetric. The centering of the metaphase plate is not a mere consequence of bipolar kinetochore–microtubule attachments or a mechanical consequence of preparing for anaphase, but still the reason for the equatorial position of the metaphase plate is not fully understood.
This article discusses the challenges of understanding the link between brain-scale circuitry and organism-scale behavior in neuroscience. The researchers focus on light-seeking navigation in zebrafish larvae to create a comprehensive Markov-chain model of navigation that can quantitatively predict the stationary distribution of the fish’s body orientation. The researchers also map this behavioral description onto a neuronal model of the ARTR, a small neural circuit involved in orientation-selection of swim bouts. The team shows that this visually-biased decision-making circuit can capture the statistics of both spontaneous and contrast-driven navigation.
A new study in the fruit fly Drosophila has identified the tiny group of brain neurons that control the insect's increased locomotion and search for food after a period of starvation. The neurons were revealed to fibres producing the adipokinetic hormone receptor, which enhanced the flies' activity upon starvation, and which was found in common with the Drosophila Insulin-like Receptor, which suppressed the starvation-induced hyperactivity. The balance of these hormones thus determines the degree to which the flies exhibit increased activity under conditions of food deprivation. The study also found that increased food consumption under starvation appears to be independently regulated. The research examined whether the behaviour in the absence of food incentives was governed by negative feedback loops or independent hormonal circuits, and found that it was the latter. Starving fruit flies manage to stimulate search behaviour more than feeding behaviour by increasing sensitivity to favourable odors and tastes, and by tactile stimulation.
PKMζ is a protein that had been proposed to maintain long-term memory, but it has been found that memory is maintained without it. Two hypotheses exist to account for this observation: 1) PKMζ is unimportant for memory, or 2) PKMζ is crucial for memory in wild-type mice, and compensatory mechanisms emerge in mice where it has been deleted. Researchers found that while PKMζ increases in normal mice during memory maintenance, in mice lacking PKMζ PKCι/λ increases instead. Using a pharmacogenetic approach, it was discovered that PKMζ-antisense blocks long-term memory in normal mice and PKCι/λ-antagonists disrupt the memory of mice without PKMζ. Maintaining long-term memory requires new protein synthesis, and the persistence of PKC isoforms may be responsible for this maintenance.
Humans run stably despite step-to-step variability in motion caused by sensorimotor noise and minor external perturbations. This variability contains information about the strategies used to maintain stability. Humans modulate the impulses applied to the ground to stabilize the horizontal and vertical motions. A simple computational biped was implemented with human-derived control strategies, showing stable running for hundreds of steps. The study also explains how humans modulate the forces to control the center of mass motion during the flight phase and how deviations from the average motion are controlled during the stance phase. The study could inform monitoring devices to quantify running stability or fall likelihood, help understand running movement disorders, and lead to better running robots.
A study has determined that the NK activating receptor NKG2D is engaged in in vivo interactions with one of its ligands, RAE-1ε, in healthy mice. RAE-1ε is constitutively expressed by lymph node endothelial cells and highly induced on tumour-associated endothelium, and this internalises NKG2D from the NK cell surface, resulting in impaired NK antitumour responses in vivo. The responsiveness of NK cells is tuned by steady-state receptor-ligand interactions, and increases in steady-state stimulation cause NK cells to adopt a less responsive state, referred to as ‘desensitisation’. In vivo blocking of RAE-1ε substantially increased NKG2D surface levels on NK cells in blood, lymph nodes, and spleen. Finally, it was discovered that endogenous, steady-state RAE-1ε expression desensitises NK responses to activation through multiple activating receptors and YAC-1 cells in vitro.
Researchers from University College London and Cambridge University have published a study on subcortical pathways in the brain that are involved in processing fearful faces. Studying 622 participants using diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, researchers applied probabilistic tractography to reconstruct the brain's subcortical pathway to the amygdala via the pulvinar. The findings reveal that more robust subcortical pathways in the brain lead to greater coupling when presented with fearful faces, improving the ability of the individual to recognise the threat.
The ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vlPAG) plays a role in organizing fear output in response to potential harm. It is thought that the vlPAG receives threat probability estimates from the amygdala, and then organizes fear-related behavior. However, recent studies have shown that vlPAG single-unit activity does not always align with freezing behavior, one indicator of fear output. This study hypothesized that vlPAG neurons may actually signal threat probability. To test this, rats were trained to discriminate between three auditory cues that predicted different foot shock probabilities, and their fear responses were measured using conditioned suppression of reward seeking. The researchers found that vlPAG onset activity (a sharp increase in firing during the first 1 second of the cue) reflected threat probability, while ramping activity (activity that gradually increased over the course of the cue) reflected both threat probability and fear output. Onset neurons showed differential firing to each of the three cues, with the greatest firing to the danger cue, lesser firing to the uncertainty cue, and least firing to the safety cue. Ramping neurons showed the most activity to danger and uncertainty cues, with activity gradually increasing over the cue presentation. When the firing of single neurons was compared, a bias towards greater firing to the danger cue was observed. This suggests that vlPAG neurons may signal threat probability and bias fear output accordingly.
Researchers have discovered that complete genetic deficiency for SEC24A, a COPII component, is compatible with normal survival and development in mice. However, these animals exhibit markedly reduced plasma cholesterol due to selective blockade in the secretion of PCSK9, a circulating factor that negatively regulates cell surface LDL receptor expression. SEC24A-deficient cells up-regulate hepatic LDLR levels as a consequence of specific dependence of PCSK9, a negative regulator of LDLR, on SEC24A for efficient exit from the ER. The researchers also identified partial overlap in cargo selectivity between SEC24A and SEC24B.
The process of translation elongation, in which the ribosome moves along the mRNA template to incorporate each new amino acid and translocate from one codon to the next, requires significant structural rearrangements of the ribosome. A recent study found that deep sequencing of ribosome-protected mRNA fragments revealed the position of each ribosome and its particular stage of the elongation cycle. The sequencing revealed two distinct populations of ribosome footprints, 28-30 nucleotides and 20-22 nucleotides long, representing ribosomes in different states, differentially stabilized by specific elongation inhibitors. Further investigation showed that the balance of small and large footprints varies by codon and is correlated with translation speed. The ability to visualize conformational changes in the ribosome during elongation provides a new way to study the detailed kinetics of translation and to identify the factors that affect each step in the elongation cycle.
Streptomyces bacteria, which are known for their complex developmental life cycle and ability to produce specialized metabolites, have been found to exhibit a previously unknown mode of growth called "exploratory growth" when in contact with fungi. These explorer cells adopt a non-branching vegetative hyphal conformation that enables them to traverse solid surfaces, and the fungi can trigger this growth by altering the composition of the growth medium. The growth mode can also be communicated to other, physically separate Streptomyces cells using a volatile organic compound. This discovery suggests that interkingdom interactions can trigger novel developmental behaviours and that microbial growth and development should be investigated with multi-species cultures.
Researchers have determined the crystal structure of the conserved light intermediate chain (LIC) domain which binds the motor heavy chain in a thermophilic fungus. The LIC has a Ras-like fold with insertions that distinguish it from other G proteins. The fungal LIC has lost its ability to bind nucleotide, while the human LIC1 binds GDP preferentially over GTP. The LIC G domain binds the dynein heavy chain using a conserved patch of aromatic residues while the less conserved C-terminal domain binds several Rab effectors involved in membrane transport. These studies provide the first structural information and insight into the evolutionary origin of the LIC as well as revealing how this critical subunit connects the dynein motor to cargo.
Transposable elements (TEs) are self-replicating DNA fragments that can occupy large fractions of genomes and have been found across various organisms. They are often considered "parasitic" because they can disrupt the normal functioning of the host genome. Sexual reproduction can either facilitate or reduce the accumulation of TEs in a population, and it has been uncertain whether the net effect of sex on TE loads is positive or negative. By studying the genomic TE loads over time in experimental populations of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, researchers provide direct evidence that TE loads decrease rapidly under asexual reproduction. The reduction of TE loads is likely due to the evolution of increased TE excision rates, meaning the excision of TEs from the host genome. In contrast, sex plays a significant role in maintaining TEs in the yeast genome. The findings suggest that TEs evolve to become benign in asexual organisms, which is in line with the idea that most asexual species have short life spans due to the negative consequences of accumulating TE copies.
The response of fruit flies to acetic acid, a compound found in fermenting fruit that can be both nutritious and toxic, depends on the hunger state of the fly. Fed flies show an aversion to acetic acid, while starved flies show a strong attraction. This is due to the activation of two distinct taste pathways, the sugar pathway for attraction and the bitter pathway for aversion. These opposing responses allow the fly to consume nutritious foods while avoiding toxic compounds. Hunger shifts the response from aversion to attraction by enhancing the sugar pathway and suppressing the bitter pathway. The proboscis extension response (PER), which initiates feeding behavior, is used to measure the response to acetic acid. In starved flies, PER is elicited by acetic acid and is part of an appetitive feeding response. This response is mediated by gustatory neurons and is not affected by the removal of olfactory organs.
Researchers have found that the enzyme arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (AANAT1) in Drosophila is expressed by astrocytes and certain subsets of neurons in the adult brain. AANAT1 acetylates monoamines and inactivates them, limiting the accumulation of serotonin and dopamine in the brain upon sleep deprivation. Loss of AANAT1 from astrocytes, but not from neurons, results in an increase in daytime recovery sleep following overnight sleep deprivation. The researchers conclude that AANAT1 and astrocytes are crucial in the regulation of monoamine bioavailability and homeostatic sleep. 
Mobile genetic elements called retrotransposons drive the evolution of mammalian genomes but their movement can also cause genetic disorders. Retrotransposon mobilisation is led by L1 elements in pluripotent cells early in human development. Through analysis of mice, researchers found that Tex19.1, a gene induced by developmental DNA hypomethylation, interacts with L1-encoded protein L1-ORF1p to restrict L1 mobilisation. Loss of Tex19.1 results in more L1-ORF1p levels and L1 mobilisation in mouse embryonic stem cells, thus, post-translational control of L1 retrotransposons is vital in maintaining trans-generational genome stability in mammals.
The document discusses how high-throughput assays have shed light on the structure of animal chromatin but the physical nature of observed structures and the forces that govern their establishment remain poorly understood. High resolution Hi-C data from early Drosophila embryos are presented, demonstrating that boundaries between topological domains of various sizes map to DNA elements that resemble classical insulator elements. They propose a model in which decompaction of boundary-insulator-interband regions drives the organization of interphase chromosomes by creating stable physical separation between adjacent domains. The document also discusses the advancements in high-throughput methods to probe three-dimensional structure of chromatin and the general features observed in the high-resolution chromatin maps. The boundaries between topological domains are shown to be short genomic regions that are strongly bound by known insulator proteins and are sensitive to DNase digestion, and they propose a model in which decompaction of these regions drives the organization of interphase chromosomes by creating stable physical separation between adjacent domains.
Loss of LRRK2 in macrophages leads to heightened levels of type I interferon and interferon-stimulated genes, but a blunted response to mycobacterial pathogens and cytosolic nucleic acid agonists. These responses are due to mitochondrial stresses, including oxidative stress and DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fragmentation, which promotes mtDNA leakage into the cytosol and chronic cGAS engagement. While Lrrk2 KO mice can control Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) replication, they exhibit exacerbated inflammation and lower ISG expression in the lungs. LRRK2's role in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis is critical for proper inductions of type I IFN gene expression in macrophages and for downstream inflammatory responses during in vivo infection.
Epithelial cells and neurons interact to influence various sensory modalities such as taste, touch and smell. The developmental origins and functional roles of epidermal ensheathment of sensory neurites are not fully understood. A study in Drosophila and zebrafish has identified an evolutionarily conserved morphogenetic mechanism for epidermal ensheathment of somatosensory neurites, which enhances dendrite branching and reduces nociceptive sensitivity. The report suggests that ensheathment of somatosensory neurons by epidermal cells is a deeply conserved cellular process that plays key roles in the morphogenesis and function of nociceptive sensory neurons. PIP2 markers on epithelial membrane-associated molecules were shown to preferentially localize to sites of dendrite ensheathment. Endocytic, cytoskeletal, and phagocytic markers all contribute to the ensheathment of somatosensory neurites.
The biteOscope is a new device that allows for the high-resolution imaging and quantitative characterization of mosquito blood feeding behavior. The device consists of a transparent host mimic, which mosquitoes are attracted to and can bite to obtain an artificial blood meal. Using machine learning and computational tools, the behavior of several species of medically important mosquitoes was characterized, including Ae. aegypti, Ae. albopictus, An. stephensi, and An. coluzzii. The biteOscope also revealed that the common insect repellent DEET repels An. coluzzii upon contact with their legs. This technology provides a new perspective on mosquito blood feeding and has the potential to increase our understanding of the sensory biology and genetics of blood feeding, and the effects external and internal variables have on this behavior, with the goal of curbing pathogen transmission.
The minor spliceosome's catalytic snRNP, U6atac, is unstable and its level is dependent on both RNA polymerases II and III. The U6atac level can be increased by the cell stress-activated kinase p38MAPK, which stabilizes it and enhances mRNA expression of hundreds of minor intron-containing genes that are otherwise suppressed by limiting U6atac. Minor introns are embedded molecular switches regulated by U6atac abundance, providing a novel post-transcriptional gene expression mechanism and a rationale for the minor spliceosome's evolutionary conservation. The method used is designed to monitor global changes in the levels of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) after transcription and translation inhibition and cell cycle arrest. As a result, the study discovered that U6atac inactivation affects a large number of genes.
Mitochondria respond to glucose levels by stopping active transport in high glucose regions. This phenomenon was explored quantitatively through a reaction-diffusion formalism, which describes the behavior of species subject to both consumption and diffusion, and the study concludes that mitochondrial localization is a plausible regulatory mechanism for neuronal metabolic flexibility in the presence of spatially heterogeneous glucose, as may occur in long processes of projection neurons. The approach demonstrates the control of cellular bioenergetics through organelle trafficking. Mitochondrial positioning relies on an interplay between heterogeneously distributed diffusive signaling molecules, their consumption through metabolic and other pathways, and their effect on motor transport kinetics. By localizing specific enzymes in regions of high metabolic demand, cells have the potential to substantially enhance their metabolism.
Prostate cancer is the most common male sex-specific cancer and is driven by androgen steroid hormones. Androgens control transcription by stimulating androgen receptor (AR) activity, yet also control pre-mRNA splicing through less clear mechanisms. In this study, it was found that androgens regulate splicing through AR-mediated transcriptional control of the epithelial-specific splicing regulator ESRP2. ESRP2 and its close paralog ESRP1 are highly expressed in primary prostate cancer, and androgen stimulation induces splicing switches in many endogenous ESRP2-controlled mRNA isoforms. ESRP2 expression in clinical prostate cancer is repressed by androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), which may inadvertently dampen epithelial splice programs. The study identifies an AR-ESRP2 axis controlling splicing patterns in prostate cancer cells, and suggests that reduced ESRP2 levels in response to ADT may inadvertently help prime prostate cancer cells to facilitate longer-term disease progression.
Researchers have identified six transcription factors that control the differentiation of serotonergic HSN neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans, a type of neuron similar to mouse serotonergic neurons. Using this model organism, the researchers were able to identify the cis-regulatory transcriptional code that controls HSN neuron differentiation and activate its target sequences. The HSN transcriptome most closely resembles that of mouse serotonergic neurons, suggesting deep homology. The identification of these rules could be useful for understanding fundamental biological processes and disease-associated mutations. The HSN TF combination acts mainly as an activator of transcription, and the six transcription factors are expressed in the HSN at L4, coinciding with the onset of differentiation. The temporal control of HSN differentiation is regulated by proneural TF of the asc family, ortholog of mouse Ascl1 and Drosophila Scute.
Cellular components must be degraded and recycled for cell growth and survival. This study focuses on how lysosomal protein degradation pathways cooperate during nutrient limitation to ensure cell survival. A quantitative analysis of yeast proteomics was performed upon starvation and it was found that many integral plasma membrane proteins underwent endocytosis and degradation in vacuoles via the MVB pathway within the first three hours. This selective degradation of plasma membrane proteins via the MVB pathway was mainly responsible for de novo synthesis of vacuolar hydrolases and maintenance of amino acids levels. Autophagy was also activated and remained active throughout starvation, delivering bulk cytoplasm into lysosomes. Collectively, these pathways were essential to complete the cell division cycle and enter a quiescent state for survival. These findings provide insight into how lysosomal proteolysis pathways work together to mediate cell survival during nutrient limitation.
Scientists have engineered a potent small molecule, IPA, that binds to the ATP-binding pocket of two stress sensors, IRE1 and PERK, which function in the unfolded protein response. IPA activates IRE1's RNase and, paradoxically, inhibits PERK but also activates it at low concentrations, resulting in a bell-shaped activation profile. The study sheds light on the mechanism by which partial occupancy with an inhibitor can activate kinases and has implications for the design and therapeutic application of kinase inhibitors.
V1 and V2b interneurons are necessary for producing a flexor-extensor motor output in terrestrial animals. A study using selective ablations of either V1 or V2b in the spinal cord showed that they control flexor-extensor-driven movements. Ablation of V1 resulted in limb hyperflexion and loss of V2b in hindlimb hyperextension, suggesting that V1 is important for proper extension movements and V2b for the timely initiation and execution of limb flexion movements. The study also revealed a bias in the innervation of flexor and extensor motor neurons by V1 and V2b, respectively. The ablation technique used was highly selective and efficient in deleting V1 and V2b interneurons.
The status signalling hypothesis suggests that within species, ornaments signal dominance status. The black bib of male house sparrows has been a textbook example of this hypothesis, but a meta-analysis challenges this conclusion. The study found several biases in the literature, including publication bias and time-lag bias, and that the overall effect size was small and uncertain. The meta-analysis used both summary and primary data from published and unpublished studies. The study calls for renewed attention to hypotheses explaining within-species variation in ornamentation.
Researchers have developed a large-scale transgenic short guide (sg) RNA library for efficient CRISPR-based disruption of specific target genes in a constitutive or conditional manner. The library currently consists of over 2600 plasmids and 1700 fly lines with a focus on targeting kinases, phosphatases, and transcription factors, each expressing two sgRNA's under control of the Gal4/UAS system. The researchers have developed a series of tunable Cas9 lines that allow gene editing with high efficiency and low toxicity independent of enhancer strength. They have conducted the largest fully transgenic CRISPR screen in any metazoan organism, which reveals many so far uncharacterized genes essential for development. The system is robust across many target genes and can be efficiently employed in various somatic tissues, as well as the germline.
A study on Swedish Arabidopsis thaliana accessions grown at different temperatures found that CHH methylation increased with higher temperatures in transposons. Gene body methylation (GBM) was correlated with the latitude of origin, meaning that accessions from colder regions had higher levels of GBM for a significant fraction of the genome. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) revealed that CHH methylation variation was strongly associated with genetic variants in both cis and trans, including a major trans-association close to the DNA methyltransferase CMT2. The effect of genetic variation on local CHH methylation was also examined by calculating the methylation level in 200 bp sliding windows across the genome. The analysis confirmed substantial cis and trans associations, with the environment modulating the genetic effects rather than having a major direct effect. At least for the cis associations, a possible explanation is that SNPs tag polymorphic TE insertions, with the insertion allele being silenced in a temperature-sensitive manner. CHH methylation is associated with transposable elements (TEs) and in agreement with this, 79% of the temperature DMRs where methylation was gained were located within 500 bp of an annotated TE.
Phosphorylation of macromolecular interactions is important in signaling networks, particularly in the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) which enables errorless chromosome segregation. The SAC kinase Mps1 phosphorylates multiple MELT motifs on the kinetochore subunit Spc105/Knl1, promoting recruitment of downstream signaling components. This study reports that Bub3, a 7-bladed β-propeller, is the MELTP reader, and mutations targeting the Bub3 interface prevent kinetochore recruitment of the SAC kinase Bub1 and cause a checkpoint defect. Bub1 binds Bub3 through a conserved Bub3-binding domain; and the dependency of phosphorylation for binding specificity between Bub1-Bub3 and MELTP motifs supports this mechanism of kinetochore recruitment.
Researchers from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM) and Stanford University have used human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) to create a new model for studying the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The blood-brain barrier is made up of special cells known as endothelial cells and is crucial for regulating the central nervous system. The researchers found that activation of the Wnt signalling pathway – a pathway critical for both CNS angiogenesis and the coupled process of barrier cell generation – leads to the acquisition of the BBB phenotype characteristic. This technology offers a way to better understand and potentially treat diseases involving the brain, such as Alzheimer’s and brain cancer.
A study published in eLife investigated the role of grid-like representations in the human entorhinal cortex in imagining or simulating future events, beyond just spatial navigation. Participants underwent fMRI scans while imagining directions between building locations in a large-scale virtual reality city, and the researchers found evidence of grid-like representations contributing to mental simulation. The study used multi-voxel pattern analysis and found a 60° periodic pattern-similarity structure in the entorhinal cortex. The findings support the notion that the entorhinal grid-system plays a role in future anticipation and prediction beyond just spatial navigation.
Rough-skinned newts produce tetrodotoxin (TTX) as a chemical defense against predation, which blocks voltage-gated sodium (Nav) channels. Some populations can produce extreme levels of TTX due to a coevolutionary arms race with TTX-resistant predatory snakes. However, the source of TTX in newts was previously unknown. In this study, researchers investigated whether symbiotic bacteria isolated from toxic newts could produce TTX. Bacterial symbionts from the skin of a toxic population of newts were characterized, and bacterial culture media were screened for TTX. TTX-producing bacterial strains from four genera were identified. The researchers also examined the molecular basis of TTX resistance in newts, identifying amino acid substitutions in five Nav channel paralogs. Site-directed mutagenesis experiments showed that these amino acid substitutions reduced TTX sensitivity in vitro. These findings suggest that host-associated bacteria may underlie the production of a critical defensive compound in a vertebrate host.
Researchers have mapped the structure of a bacterial pore-forming protein, using real-time techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electron microscopy (EM). They found that the assembly of the protein is a non-cooperative process that completed before the protein can insert into the membrane, resulting in ring-shaped pores and kinetically trapped arc-shaped assemblies. They also found that membrane insertion requires a concerted conformational change of the monomeric subunits, with a marked expansion in pore diameter due to large changes in subunit structure and packing. The bacterial pore-forming proteins, which convert from soluble monomers to oligomeric membranes inserted pores, act as bacterial virulence factors and effectors in immune defence.
Tapeworms are parasitic flatworms that have the ability to regenerate parts of their body to maintain their equilibrium length. To investigate the molecular basis of tapeworm regeneration, researchers used the rat intestinal tapeworm, Hymenolepis diminuta, and found that regenerative potential is regionally limited to the neck area, where head-dependent extrinsic signals create a permissive microenvironment for stem cell-driven regeneration. They characterize and functionally validate regulators of tapeworm growth and regeneration, finding that stem cells are not restricted to the regeneration-competent neck but are found throughout the tapeworm body. The head and neck tissues provide extrinsic cues that regulate stem cells, enabling region-specific regeneration in this parasite. The study identifies H. diminuta as an excellent model for the study of stem cells and regeneration, with the power to inform our understanding of parasite physiology.
This document discusses the role of PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) in protecting the germ line of chickens by targeting transposable elements (TEs) through base-pair complementarity. Active TEs in the chicken germ line are all targeted by piRNAs, which erode away as the TEs lose their activity. De novo piRNA birth occurs as the host responds to a recent retroviral invasion. Avian leukosis virus (ALV) endogenized prior to chicken domestication, remains infectious and threatens the poultry industry. Domestic fowl produce piRNAs targeting ALV from one ALV provirus that was known to render its host ALV resistant. This proviral locus does not produce piRNAs in undomesticated wild chickens. The paper also discusses the discovery of rapid piRNA evolution, the identification of a new piRNA acquisition modality and the extension of piRNA defense roles to include the period when endogenous retroviruses are still infectious.
Researchers have identified a novel active zone gene called clarinet (cla-1) in the nematode C. elegans that coordinates synaptic vesicle clustering and release. In experiments, cla-1 mutants showed defects in active zone structure, synapse number and vesicle distribution near the presynaptic dense projection, resulting in reduced spontaneous vesicle release and increased synaptic depression. CLA-1L, which is composed of approximately 9,000 amino acids, was found to be specifically required for proper clustering of vesicles at the synapse. The researchers found that CLA-1 is broadly expressed in the nervous system and is necessary and sufficient to mediate synaptic vesicle clustering. 
Insects use feedback from their visual and mechanosensory modalities to maintain their speeds during navigation. Optic flow is essential for speed determination, but insects rely on feedback from antennal mechanosensors under low light or sparse landmark conditions. Honeybees use their antennae to actively move forward when experiencing frontal airflow during forward flight, but move backward when experiencing corresponding front-to-back optic flow, maintaining antennal position in a state of dynamic equilibrium. Combining sensory cues from multiple modalities reduces ambiguity and is essential for most natural locomotory behaviors, including insect flight maneuvers. Mechanosensory feedback from antennae has also been identified as a key sensory input for insect flight in recent years. The airflow cues sensed by Johnston's organs and the optic flow cues sensed by eyes combine to maintain and control antennal position during flight in honeybees.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a growing health issue in industrialized countries, but its pathomechanisms are not yet fully understood. This study focuses on the role of the Hedgehog pathway in lipid metabolism in the liver. Using transgenic mice with conditional hepatocyte-specific deletion of Smoothened, the study showed that inhibiting Hedgehog signalling can lead to steatosis by altering the abundance of transcription factors GLI1 and GLI3. On the other hand, activating the Hedgehog pathway mitigated hepatic steatosis. The study highlights the importance of the Hedgehog pathway in preventing and treating NAFLD.
Researchers have used high throughput chromosome conformation capture to provide the first global view of chromosome conformation in diploid yeasts, examining how homolog pairing and environmental conditions affect the 3D organisation of genomes in the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The study found that the yeast genome has a dynamic and complex 3D organisation, with the genome being actively organised in the nucleus in both space and time, which has an impact on fundamental biological processes like transcription, DNA repair, and recombination. While previous studies have argued that a simple volume-exclusion polymer model of chromosomes in a Rabl-like orientation is sufficient to explain microscopy and Hi-C data of the budding yeast genome, these data demonstrate the complexity of the organism's 3D genome organisation.
Researchers have discovered that straight-tusked elephants, which were widespread across Eurasia during the Pleistocene, were actually more closely related to the extant African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis) than to the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus), to which it had previously been grouped using morphological traits. This discovery was made through the recovery of full mitochondrial genomes from four and partial nuclear genomes from two P. antiquus fossils found in Germany that date back to interglacial periods about 120,000 and 244,000 years ago. The results suggest that Loxodonta has not been constrained to Africa as previously thought, and that widespread changes are needed for the current understanding of elephant evolutionary history.
The protein cavin3 is commonly inactivated in cancer and researchers studied its effects on the cellular proteome using genome-edited cells and quantitative proteomics. They found that cavin3 plays a significant role in DNA repair, with BRCA1 and BRCA1 A-complex components being downregulated on cavin3 deletion. Cavin3 sensitizes various cancer cells to UV-induced apoptosis and is involved in a broad range of cancer-related processes including proliferation, apoptosis, Warburg metabolism, as well as in cell migration and matrix metalloproteinase regulation. The study reveals a novel function for cavin3 mediated through its interaction with BRCA1, leading to regulation of BRCA1 levels, subcellular location, and function. BRCA1 is a significant breast cancer suppressor gene, and cavin3 supports BRCA1 protein levels, making it a potential target for cancer therapy.
The Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes are vectors of several serious diseases, including dengue and chikungunya, and their global distribution is incompletely understood. This comprehensive study has used data from literature and national entomological surveys to create a detailed database of the mosquitoes' distribution worldwide, enabling the creation of maps to inform public health planning. The data also show that the mosquitoes' distributions are now extensive in all continents, including North America and Europe, underlining the importance of robust disease control.
A computational study looking at the effects of partially blocking the transmission of HIV has found that it can lead to an increase in the number of living infected cells. Using a simulated model, the study observed that if the number of viral DNA copies remained above one and infections were partially inhibited, there was a decrease in cell death when surplus viral copies were eliminated. When testing this with antiretroviral drugs and neutralising antibody, it saw an increase in live infected cells with fewer HIV DNA copies per cell. The study found that a peak in the number of infected cells occurred at intermediate drug strength and called it the “infection optimum”. The study suggests an infection optimum peaks at higher drug strengths as the cost of multiple infections per cell occurs.
A study using Magnetoencephalography to record neural activity tested whether competition for processing resources occurs between task-irrelevant speech and to-be-attended speech, particularly for linguistic processing. Task-irrelevant stimuli consisted of syllables structured to form coherent sentences, with neural responses indicating that linguistic processing of task-irrelevant speech was not fully eliminated by selective attention. Additionally, neural tracking of to-be-attended speech in left inferior frontal regions was enhanced when competing with structured task-irrelevant stimuli, suggesting inherent competition between them for linguistic processing. The study aimed to broaden the conversation on whether concurrent speech is processed and the nature of competition for linguistic resources between attended and task-irrelevant input. The study found evidence that integration-based processes operating on longer timestamps are applied to task-irrelevant speech for identifying longer linguistic units comprised of several syllables.
Elevated Hipk in an in vivo tumor model drives transcriptional upregulation of Drosophila Myc and induces robust expression of pfk2, among other glycolytic genes, thereby elevating aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells. Pfk2 catalyzes the synthesis of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, which acts as a potent allosteric activator of Phosphofructokinase (Pfk) and thus stimulates glycolysis. Pfk2 and Pfk in turn are required to sustain dMyc protein accumulation post-transcriptionally, establishing a positive feedback loop. The study reveals a reciprocal stimulation of Myc and aerobic glycolysis and identifies the Pfk2-Pfk governed committed step of glycolysis as a metabolic vulnerability during tumorigenesis.
A study has been carried out investigating the hypothesis that in placebo hypoalgesia, the precision of expectations is a key factor in treatment outcomes. The study used a Bayesian framework to combine expectation magnitudes and precisions, postulating that expectations are integrated with incoming nociceptive information and both are weighted by their relative precision to form the pain percept and placebo effect. Sixty-two healthy subjects received heat pain during fMRI, and the placebo effects were more pronounced in subjects with more precise treatment expectations. The study found that the neural correlates of this precision were observed in the periaqueductal gray and the rostral ventromedial medulla. This provides strong evidence for Bayesian integration in placebo hypoalgesia.
The protein Sirt6 is involved in DNA damage repair, metabolic regulation, inflammation, tumorigenesis, and aging. Loss of Sirt6 in mice leads to premature aging and death. A study found that partial reduction of the tumor suppressor gene Trp53 significantly extended the lifespan of Sirt6-deficient mice, rescuing age-related health issues such as reduced body size and weight, lordokyphosis, colitis, and bone marrow stem cell decline. The study suggests that the elevated activity of Trp53 contributes to accelerated aging in Sirt6-deficient mice, and highlights the importance of
The protein Asl initiates the recruitment of DSpd-2 and Cnn to mother centrioles, who then form co-dependent scaffold-like structures that spread outwards and recruit other PCM components, allowing for the expansion of the PCM during mitosis in flies. This simple mechanism could be regulated by centrioles and seems to function as an important coordination center in the cell. The paper also analyzes the dynamic behavior of eight Drosophila centrosomal proteins and shows that only DSpd-2 behaves like Cnn, indicating that it incorporates into the PCM close to the centrioles and then spreads slowly outward to form a scaffold-like structure that recruits other PCM components. The study used spinning disk confocal microscopy to perform fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments combined with radial-profiling to quantify spatio-temporal dynamics of various fusion proteins in Drosophila syncytial embryos.
The document discusses how stem cells can detect and regenerate missing tissues in response to injury. Planarian flatworms are used as a model organism for studying this process due to their exceptional regenerative abilities and abundant stem cell population. The study shows that planarian stem cells have different responses to organ loss depending on the tissue type, and can tailor their output to match the regenerative needs of the animal. The authors propose that injury channels the output of stem cells towards missing tissues, resulting in targeted regeneration. The study also highlights the importance of timing in stem cell activity during injury response, with stem cells generated one day after tissue removal being targeted towards missing tissues.
Researchers have identified a new target for drugs to attack brain tumours that are resistant to chemotherapy. A study published in the open-access eLife journal shows that genetic inactivation of the Atm cofactor Atmin strongly suppresses the formation of cells that cause glioblastomas, the most common and aggressive type of primary brain cancer, in mice. Inhibition of the tumour promoting kinase ATM, which works with Atmin, also reduced the proliferation of primary glioma cells from human and mouse tumours.

Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscopy (FIB-SEM) is a technique that can generate 3D images with excellent z-axis resolution for biological imaging, but has been limited by slow imaging speeds and lack of system stability. Researchers have now developed techniques to improve acquisition speed and system reliability, enabling them to generate large volumes of data suitable for connectomics and cell biology. This allows for clearer visualization of complex biological structures, providing a gold standard for connectome derivation from TEM sections. The technique can also accelerate tedious proofreading efforts for connectomics. The researchers used FIB-SEM to image various parts of the Drosophila brain and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to illustrate the power of this novel high-resolution technique to address questions in connectomics and cell biology.
This study shows that elevated concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide (eCO2) can reduce protein and nitrogen concentrations while increasing non-structural carbohydrates in C3 plants. Additionally, the study found that eCO2 reduces overall mineral concentrations and increases TNC:minerals, which could exacerbate "hidden hunger" and obesity. This issue has been obscured in previous studies due to contradictory findings, with some research groups challenging the notion of lower mineral content in plants exposed to eCO2 in field conditions. However, this study shows that as statistical power increases, the effect of eCO2 on plant minerals becomes increasingly visible. Overall, eCO2 reduces concentrations of P, K, Ca, S, Mg, Fe, Zn, and Cu by 6.5-10%, while C increases by 6%.
The document discusses how animals, including humans, exhibit myopia in two different contexts: foraging and intertemporal choice. Despite previous efforts to understand this behavior, it has been challenging to reconcile observations in terms of a consistent pattern of time preferences. Through extensive behavioral testing and quantitative modeling, the study found that rats exhibit similar time preferences in both contexts and are sensitive to the opportunity costs of delays to future decisions. The study suggests that quasi-hyperbolic discounting may be a common mechanism for suboptimal decision-making across tasks.
Researchers have investigated the coexistence of four closely related Lactobacillus species in the gut of honey bees. They found that coexistence was only possible in the presence of pollen in both in vivo and in vitro environments, indicating resource partitioning as the basis of coexistence. The four species utilized different pollen-derived carbohydrate substrates, allowing them to occupy distinct ecological niches. The study also highlights the challenges of investigating bacterial coexistence in host-associated microbial communities and the need for in vitro models. The findings suggest that the partitioning of pollen-derived nutrients is sufficient to enable coexistence and that genes involved in nutrient acquisition and metabolism were differentially expressed between dietary treatments.
A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the gene Atg16l1 has been associated with an increased risk of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but how it contributes to intestinal immune homeostasis has remained unclear. A study has found that autophagy - the degradation and recycling of damaged organelles and proteins - is essential for maintaining balanced CD4+ T cell responses in the intestine, and that specific ablation of Atg16l1 in Foxp3+ Treg cells demonstrates autophagy directly promotes their survival and metabolic adaptation in the intestine. The study suggests that recalibration of the level of autophagy in Treg cells could offer a novel approach to the treatment of IBD.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a network of signal transduction pathways that ensures the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) remains in homeostasis by responding to an imbalance between the protein folding load and the protein folding capacity in the ER. In S. pombe, the ER-resident kinase/endoribonuclease Ire1 utilizes a mechanism of selective degradation of ER-bound mRNAs (RIDD) to maintain homeostasis. This paper identifies several proteins critical to Ire1-mediated UPR, including Dom34, Hbs1, and Ski complex subunits, previously implicated in ribosome rescue and mRNA no-go-decay (NGD). The study also shows that the UPR in S. pombe executes RIDD in an intimate interplay between Ire1, translation, and the NGD surveillance pathway, and establishes the critical role of NGD in maintaining ER homeostasis. The paper used a genetic screen to identify genes involved in the UPR in S. pombe and showed that the NGD machinery Dom34/Hbs1 and the exosome-associated Ski-complex are critical players. The study also identified hundreds of novel mRNA targets of Ire1 using short-read ribosome profiling methodology. The precise and widespread nature of these target sites allowed the researchers to show that stalled ribosomes serve as a ruler to template regularly spaced upstream mRNA cleavage events.
A new study has highlighted significant differences in gene expression across different skeletal muscle tissues, suggesting intrinsic transcriptional diversity among the muscles. Working with mice and rats, researchers at Duke University used RNA sequencing to analyse the mRNA expression profiles of skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle tissues. "MuscleDB" revealed that more than 50% of transcripts were differentially expressed among skeletal muscle tissues, with distinct gene expression profiles conserved across species and sex, suggesting relevance to human health. This data set may be applied to the study of disease, particularly muscular dystrophy and regenerative medicine.
The document discusses the use of deep learning for bioimage analysis in the life sciences, particularly for analyzing fluorescent labels. However, manual annotation of these labels can be subjective, which can yield biased or unstable models. The document proposes an analysis pipeline that integrates data annotation, ground truth estimation, and model training to mitigate these issues. The study tests different DL-based strategies and finds that training models on the pooled input of multiple human experts using ground truth estimation can increase objectivity and that ensembles of consensus models can enhance reliability and validity. The study highlights the importance of establishing objectivity, reliability, and validity when using DL in bioimage analysis to ensure trustworthiness of the models. The document provides guidelines for reproducible DL-based bioimage analyses.
Self-propagating CRISPR-based gene drive systems are predicted to be highly invasive even with the presence of drive-resistant alleles, according to a new study published in eLife. Mathematical models developed by researchers show that the lack of spread of resistant alleles to large populations means that even the least effective drive systems reported to date are expected to be highly invasive. The spreading of such organisms, for instance as part of malaria prevention programmes, could result in unintended spread to additional populations.
The study explores how the E3 ubiquitin ligase ZNRF2 acts as a component of the amino acid sensing machinery that activates mTORC1. The study finds that ZNRF2 interacts with mTOR on membranes, promotes the amino acid-stimulated translocation of mTORC1 to lysosomes and its activation, and also interacts with the V-ATPase and preserves lysosomal acidity. The study also shows that upon growth factor and amino acid stimulation, mTORC1 phosphorylates ZNRF2 on Ser145, and this phosphosite is dephosphorylated by protein phosphatase 6. These findings present ZNRF2 as a positive regulator of
A new study identifies an effector molecule of a plant-unique RAB5 group, ARA6, called PLANT-UNIQUE RAB5 EFFECTOR 2 (PUF2), which coordinates vacuolar transport with canonical RAB5 on endosomes. To ensure the organized and specialized functions of each RAB GTPase, interactions with effector proteins should be regulated for each trafficking event. The study shows that PUF2 is a key integrator of the two RAB5 groups in the unique endosomal trafficking system of plants.
Researchers have investigated the role of beta-subunits in Nav channels which help generate and propagate electrical signals in the human body. The researchers solved the crystal structure of the extracellular beta2 domain and identified a flexible loop and a 55Cys-containing binding region that modulates Nav1.2 toxin susceptibility by beta2. They also uncovered a disulfide bond between 55Cys and a partnering Cys located in the domain II S5-S6 pore loop of Nav1.2. The findings provide insights into the location of the beta2-subunit in the Nav channel-signaling complex and could have implications for developing therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative disorders and neuropathic pain.
The protocadherin Fat (Ft) is a key regulator of organ size and shape in flies, playing a role in growth, planar cell polarity (PCP) and proximodistal patterning. A downstream component of Ft signaling is the atypical myosin Dachs (D). The Fbxl7 gene, encoding an F-box protein, has been identified as a novel component of the Ft signaling pathway, regulating the levels and asymmetry of D at the apical membrane. Fbxl7 localizes to the proximal edge of cells where it binds to the same portion of the Ft intracellular domain (ICD) that regulates growth and PCP. Fbxl7 functions in a subset of pathways downstream of Ft, linking Ft to D localization. Meanwhile, the Hippo signaling pathway, discovered using genetic screens in flies, has emerged as a key regulator of organ size in multiple species, with mammalian orthologs performing similar functions. Several signaling molecules have been identified as downstream targets of Ft and the Hippo pathway, with multiple effector pathways implicated.
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder primarily caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene, resulting in neurological symptoms including seizures, mental retardation and autistic behavior. It is known that altered MeCP2 levels result in aberrant neurite outgrowth and glutamatergic synapse formation, but the mechanisms are not well understood since MeCP2 regulates transcription of a wide range of target genes. This study identifies a key role for a constitutive BDNF feed forward signaling pathway in regulating synaptic response, general growth and differentiation of glutamatergic neurons. Restoration of BDNF levels rescues growth and synaptic deficits in MeCP2 deficient neurons in a cell autonomous and autocrine manner in vitro and in vivo. These findings add to the current understanding of BDNF signaling in stabilizing various features of RTT patients and could inform therapeutic strategies.
SeqZip is a new methodology that uses RNA-templated DNA-DNA ligation to identify and study mechanisms underlying complex isoform expression patterns. SeqZip retains and compresses connectivity between distant sequences within individual RNA molecules and accurately reports spliced isoform abundance. It can assess intramolecular connectivity between regions separated by thousands of nucleotides and is not subject to RT processivity and template-switching limitations. SeqZip requires efficient ligation of multiple DNA oligonucleotides, each of which contain 10 nt of complementarity on either side of the loop, with a 6 nt spacer opposite the loop. It can be used to test proposed connectivity relationships among alternatively spliced exons in mouse Fibronectin (Fn1) and to define the molecular diversity of fly Dscam1.
A study has found that the left auditory cortex of the brain is responsible for representing fast rhythms and the right auditory cortex is responsible for slower rhythms when tapping fingers in synchrony with auditory beats. While the motor cortices and cerebellum only represent the temporal regularities of the motor output, coupling of auditory-motor beta oscillations supports building a metric structure. The study used functional magnetic resonance imaging and magnetoencephalography. The slow tapping condition was of primary interest in the study because two interrelated rhythms had to be represented in parallel. The timing variability was used to characterise internal timing using bimanual tapping with fast tapping being more precise with the right hand and slow tapping being more precise with the left hand. This paper suggests that functional asymmetries between the two hemispheres of the brain play an important role in hemispheric specialization in action control.
The study investigates how Drosophila Follicle Stem Cells (FSCs) maintain population asymmetry to balance stem cell division and differentiation. Two pathways, JAK-STAT and Wnt, have graded activities in the anterior-posterior (AP) dimension and strongly influence FSC behavior. The pathways promote differentiation to Escort Cells at the anterior and differentiation to Follicle Cells at the posterior of the FSC domain. The study shows that these pathways are responsible for defining the FSC domain while highlighting the dynamic heterogeneity of FSCs. The study provides further support for the current understanding of FSC numbers, locations, and behaviors.
A recent study shows that the nematode C. elegans uses nitric oxide (NO) produced by pathogenic bacteria as a cue to avoid them. PA14 mutants deficient in NO production fail to elicit avoidance and NO donors repel worms. These avoidance responses are mediated by chemosensory neuron ASJ and require receptor guanylate cyclases and cyclic nucleotide gated ion channels. ASJ shows calcium increases at the onset and removal of NO. Furthermore, the study shows that DAF-11 receptor guanylate cyclases mediate responses of ASJ to NO exposure. These findings suggest a novel mechanism by which an environmental molecule regulates behaviour.
A study of the genome activation in chickens following fertilization has found that only the maternal genome is activated in the zygote, while the paternal genome remains silent until a second wave of activation occurs later. The study identified avian-specific expression patterns during the first wave of transcriptional activation, indicating the role of maternal alleles in early embryogenesis. The study suggests that the evolved activation of maternal alleles after fertilization in chickens is a necessity due to physiological polyspermy.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has various immune evasion strategies, including evading antibody-mediated immune control by counteracting host Fc-gamma receptor (FcγR) mediated immune control mechanisms such as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). This is achieved through the expression of viral Fc-gamma binding glycoproteins (vFcγRs) gp34 and gp68, which bind IgG simultaneously at topologically different Fcγ sites and achieve efficient antagonization of host FcγR activation by distinct but synergizing mechanisms. While gp34 enhances immune complex internalization, gp68 acts as an inhibitor of host FcγR binding to immune complexes. The synergy of gp34 and gp68 is compelled by the interfering influence of excessive non-immune IgG ligands, and highlights conformational changes within the IgG globular chains critical for antibody effector function. HCMV constitutes the prototypical human pathogenic β-herpesvirus found worldwide, and has a huge and varied arsenal of immunoevasins that counteract immune recognition of infected cells, facilitating virus persistence, shedding, and superinfection of sero-positive hosts. While HCMV can replicate and disseminate in the presence of highly neutralizing immune sera in vitro, clinical isolates of HCMV tend to disseminate via cell-to-cell spread, thus avoiding an encounter with neutralizing antibodies. HCMV encodes four distinct molecules which share the ability to bind Fcγ.
Researchers have discovered a mechanism in double-stranded RNA viruses by which mRNA transcription is highly regulated. By determining the cryo-electron microscopy structures of cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus (CPV) bound with different ligands involved in regulation and capping for viral RNA transcription, the researchers discovered that the large sub-domain of guanylyltransferase (GTase) domain of CPV turret protein (TP) also has an ATP-binding site and is likely an ATPase that mediates the activation process of viral RNA transcription and capping. The process involves sensing the presence of the signal molecule SAM by methylase-2 (MT-2) domain of CPV TP, activating the putative viral ATPase, enlarging the viral capsid for efficient mRNA synthesis, and opening the GTase and MT-1 to enable guanylyl and methyl transfer.
This report discusses the critical role of lung mesenchymal stromal cell (L-MSC) aging in determining the capacity to form three-dimensional organoids with type 2 alveolar epithelial cells (AEC2s). The report demonstrates that young L-MSCs support the efficient formation of organoids, while aged L-MSCs do not, due to their cellular senescence, altered bioenergetics, and a senescence-associated secretory profile. The study indicates the critical role of cellular bioenergetics and redox homeostasis in an organoid model of self-organization, supporting the concept of thermodynamic entropy in aging biology. Aged L-MSCs are characterized by cellular senescence associated with SASP factors, oxidative stress, and alterations in regenerative pathways, which account for impaired alveolosphere formation. The report demonstrates that aging affects the self-organizing potential of alveolospheres, and the aberrant formation of alveolospheres when young AEC2s are cultured with aged L-MSCs can be rescued by replacing aged L-MSCs with age-matched Nox4-/+ L-MSCs. The study indicates that Nox4 contributes to metabolic dysfunction, bioenergetic inefficiency, and SASP programming in L-MSC aging.
The hypothalamus plays a key role in the control of body weight and appetite, and previous studies have shown that genome-wide characterization can help clarify the molecular mechanisms behind complex metabolic traits. This study used RNA-Seq to characterize hypothalamic transcriptome in 99 inbred strains of mice from the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP), identifying numerous novel non-coding RNAs and thousands of alternative splicing events regulated by genetic variants. The study also reports trans expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTLs) associated with the expression of hundreds of genes, and associations with numerous metabolic and cardiovascular traits. This information provides richer insight into the mechanisms behind hypothalamic-mediated physiologic functions and their genetic regulation, contributing to the understanding of how genetic variation leads to phenotypic differences.
The microcosms found in the pitchers of carnivorous plants, which contain complex communities of bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and arthropods, are shown to be strikingly similar in Southeast Asian Nepenthes and North American Sarracenia, which are two genera of convergently evolved plant species. Microbial communities in both genera are enriched in degradation pathways and have high abundances of key degradation enzymes. The communities associated with the two genera contain different microbial organisms and arthropods, but the species are predominantly from the same phylogenetic clades. An experimental field study showed that Nepenthes pitchers placed in a North American bog assembled Sarracenia-like communities. The findings provide evidence for the convergence of pitcher microcosms between independently evolved host genera, and identify aspects of pitcher form, physiology, and pH underpinning the similarities.
Researchers investigated the diverse cellular mechanisms underlying the emergence of different neuronal types in the developing mouse neocortex. They used a combination of methods to investigate individual progenitor cells and found that they generate pyramidal cell lineages with a wide range of sizes and laminar configurations, supporting a stochastic model of cortical neurogenesis. The findings suggest a mechanism that is capable of generating the diverse cytoarchitectures that characterize different neocortical areas. Excitatory pyramidal cells are the most abundant class of neurons in the cerebral cortex, and the relative abundance of different types largely determines the distinct cytoarchitectonic patterns observed. Researchers used replication-deficient retroviral vectors and genetic fate mapping experiments to identify the heterogeneous neurogenic fate of individual VZ progenitor cells that reveal a large range of PC lineage configurations. The study reveals that the neuronal output of neocortical VZ progenitor cells is significantly more heterogeneous than previously thought, supporting the stochastic model of cortical neurogenesis.
Ryanodine receptor type I-related myopathies (RYR1-RMs) are a group of childhood muscle diseases for which there are currently no available treatments. This study aims to identify new therapeutic targets for RYR1-RMs using a discovery pipeline using nematode, zebrafish, and mammalian cell models. Large-scale drug screens in C. elegans uncovered 74 hits, and targeted testing in zebrafish yielded positive results for two p38 inhibitors. In mouse myotubes, pharmacological inhibition or siRNA silencing of p38 impaired caffeine-induced Ca2+ release from wild type cells while promoting intracellular Ca2+ release in Ryr1 knockout cells. P38 inhibition was found to blunt the aberrant temperature-dependent increase in resting Ca2+ in myotubes from an RYR1-RM mouse model. This study provides a unique platform for RYR1-RM therapy development potentially applicable to a broad range of neuromuscular disorders.
Pigment Epithelium Derived Factor (PEDF) is a factor that inhibits the pathogenesis of several major diseases and has diverse therapeutic value. Although PEDF has been shown to have potent therapeutic effects, a long-standing challenge has been to reveal how PEDF acts on its target cells and the identities of the cell-surface receptors responsible for its activities. This study identified transmembrane proteins PLXDC1 and PLXDC2 as cell-surface receptors for PEDF using distinct cellular models. They found that PEDF receptors form homooligomers under basal conditions and that PEDF dissociates the homooligomer to activate the receptors. They also demonstrated their cell type-specific receptor activities through loss of function and gain of function studies. Further experiments suggested that PEDF binds to these cell-surface transmembrane domain proteins through their extracellular domains.
The study focused on how complex traits evolve by selecting for diurnal oscillations in budding yeast. The team expressed yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and selected for regular alternation between low and high fluorescence over a 24-hour period, which produced changes in cell adhesion rather than YFP expression. The oscillations continued for at least three cycles in a constant environment, and multiple lineages changed from the haploid to the diploid pattern of gene expression. The study provides evidence that a novel, complex phenotype can evolve by small sets of mutations in genes whose molecular functions appear to be unrelated to each other. The findings have implications for understanding the evolution of biological oscillators that drive various behaviors, from heartbeats to seasonal clocks.
The study focuses on the neural mechanisms behind social anxiety and found that trait social anxiety is associated with reduced subjective valuation of engaging in a social situation, amygdala and ventral striatum activation and functional connectivity differences related to social anxiety during social decision-making, both at the decision stage and when experiencing the outcome of a social situation. The study also found that individuals with social anxiety tend to avoid social situations and this pattern of behaviour has a significant impact on their well-being, with social isolation posing a major health risk factor. The study suggests that social avoidance behaviour can result in a cost for individuals associated with social anxiety, with individuals with an LSAS of 60, likely to suffer from generalized social phobia, earning 12.8% less than the average participant and 22.2% less than a person with an LSAS of 0.
The receptor transporting protein (RTP) family plays a dual role in both normal olfactory receptor (OR) trafficking and determining OR gene choice probabilities in olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs). Knockout mice for RTP1 and RTP2 (RTP1, 2DKO) showed defects in OR trafficking, decreased OSN activation, and reduced olfactory capacity. The presence of RTPs also affects the stability of OR gene expression in developing OSNs. The study sheds light on the link between OR protein trafficking and OR transcriptional regulation. Additionally, the RTP1, 2DKO mice had a significant reduction in mature OSNs, demonstrated by a decrease in the thickness of the olfactory epithelium and the area occupied by mature OSN markers.
The document discusses the link between planar cell polarity (PCP) and neural tube defects (NTDs), with a subset of NTD patients found to harbor mutations in PCP genes. The core PCP gene Van Gogh (Vang) is the most specific for PCP. The study investigates potential causality of NTD-associated Vangl1/2 mutations, from either mouse or human patients, in Drosophila allowing intricate analysis of the PCP pathway. The findings provide mechanistic insight into how different mammalian mutations contribute to developmental disorders and strengthen the link between PCP and NTD. The PCP pathway is critical for the morphogenesis and function of mature tissues, and perturbation of cellular polarity and tissue organization is implicated in numerous diseases. The study focuses on six mutations located in the C-terminal tail of Vang and shows that all resulted in aberrant PCP signaling and phenotypes, to varying degrees. Overall, the analyses demonstrate in molecular detail the nature of the different VANGL1/2 alleles, and they display defective PCP signaling in vivo, indicating their causative association with the NTD phenotypes of human patient mutations.
The document discusses the evolution of cave animals and specifically focuses on Astyanax mexicanus, a teleost fish. The document suggests that the rapid evolution of cave-related traits in this fish can occur due to phenotypic plasticity, where cave-related traits can appear within a single generation. The study also discusses the various challenges faced by ancestors of cave-dwelling animals, including low food availability and the absence of light, which were overcome through pre-adaptation, standing genetic variation, or phenotypic plasticity followed by genetic assimilation. The document discusses the results of an experiment where surface fish were exposed to complete darkness, which revealed numerous altered traits at both the gene expression and phenotypic levels that mimicked those of cavefish. The document also discusses the importance of various genes and metabolic processes in cave-related traits and survival, such as lipid metabolism, vision-related genes, and the regulation of metabolism. Finally, the document highlights the importance of dark-raised fish being more resistant to starvation and the possibility of lower energy expenditure.
A study has identified a set of mouse-specific protein-coding genes that have emerged recently and analyzed their translation, identifying a gene called Gm13030 that is specifically expressed in female oviducts. Knocking out the reading frame of this gene affects the transcriptional network in oviducts at a specific stage of the estrous cycle, upregulating Dcpp genes that are known to stimulate the growth of preimplantation embryos. This leads to knockout females having their second litters after shorter times and having a higher infanticide rate. The study suggests that de novo evolved genes can directly adopt a function without much sequence adaptation, and that such genes can affect female fertility and reproductive behavior.
The Dispatched protein is required for the activation of the Hedgehog pathway, which is involved in tissue morphogenesis and is linked to developmental disorders and cancer when corrupted. The regulation of Dispatched activity is not well understood, but this study shows that it is activated by proprotein convertase-mediated cleavage at a conserved processing site in its extracellular loop. This cleavage is necessary for Dispatched maturation and functional competency in Hedgehog ligand-producing cells. The study also reveals that Hedgehog ligands are produced as precursor proteins that undergo autocatalytic processing to become covalently modified by cholesterol and a long chain fatty acid, which contribute to their physiological activity. Dispatched functions with the secreted glycoprotein Scube2 to facilitate membrane extraction of the ligand, and its cleavage is required for appropriate trafficking of the ligand. The study identified that cleavage occurs at the cell surface by Furin and is required for Disp maturation and functional competency.
The document discusses the role of dopaminergic lateral olivocochlear (LOC) efferent neurons in modulating auditory nerve fiber (ANF) activity in response to changing acoustic environments. The study presents evidence that the dopaminergic LOC input to ANFs is regulated according to the animal's recent acoustic experience, with sound exposure upregulating the enzyme responsible for dopamine synthesis in cholinergic LOC neurons. The study shows that dopamine down-regulates ANF firing rates by reducing both the hair cell release rate and the size of synaptic events. The study also investigated the distribution of dopaminergic LOC fibers in the cochlea, finding that dopaminergic bouton terminals appear in distinct patches, whereas cholinergic bouton endings cover the entire cochlear spiral. The study suggests that dopaminergic LOC efferents provide an interesting candidate for investigating sound environment-dependent modulation of peripheral inputs to the auditory pathway, which could be important for detecting signals in background noise and protecting synapses from excitotoxicity caused by noise exposure.
The pseudokinase HER3 is involved in resistance to targeted therapy against HER2 in breast cancer. Lapatinib, an inhibitor of HER2, has been shown to induce proliferation with the HER3 ligand neuregulin by promoting atypical HER2-HER3 heterodimerisation. This synergy depends on their ability to promote the formation of a specific HER2 conformer, which leads to HER2-HER3 kinase domain heterocomplex formation in a head-to-head orientation. The associated clustering observed for these dimers predisposes cells to neuregulin responses, promoting a proliferative outcome. The HER3 ligand NRG is also a ligand for HER4, but the data collected suggest that HER3 is the relevant growth factor-binding receptor for the NRG response. These findings provide mechanistic insights into the role of protein conformation in therapeutic resistance.
RESOLFT microscopy is a type of super-resolution microscopy that uses fluorophore switching to overcome the diffraction barrier and allow for the observation of structures smaller than the wavelength of light. However, this method has been limited by slow switching kinetics of the fluorescent proteins used. The authors report on the development of a faster-switching reversibly photoswitchable green fluorescent protein (rsEGFP2) and its use to demonstrate faster recordings in living cells. The new protein is named rsEGFP[T65A, Q69L, V163S, A206K]. The authors found that introducing two mutations was enough to transform EGFP into an improved RSFP with better characteristics than the previous rsEGFP. The new protein exhibits a “negative” switching mode and has a pKa that is lower than that of rsEGFP. The authors also demonstrated that rsEGFP2 accommodates even more switches than rsEGFP. Its maturation time is similar to or better than other conventional fluorescent proteins. Overall, rsEGFP2 has the potential to increase imaging speeds and decrease photobleaching in RESOLFT microscopy.
The document describes the first in vitro reconstitution of cytochrome c biogenesis using purified mitochondrial and bacterial cytochrome c synthases. The researchers use apocytochrome c and peptide analogs containing the CXXCH motif as substrates, examining recognition determinants, thioether attachment, and subsequent release and folding of cytochrome c. Peptide analogs reveal very different recognition requirements between the mitochondrial and bacterial cytochrome c synthases. For HCCS, a minimal 16-mer peptide is required, comprised of CXXCH and adjacent alpha helix 1, yet neither thiol is critical for recognition. For bacterial CcsBA, both thiols and histidine are required, but not alpha helix 1. Peptide analogs behave as inhibitors of cytochrome c biogenesis, paving the way for targeted control.
The study conducted a chemical suppressor screen on zebrafish tremblor embryos that suffer from calcium extrusion defects. They identified a compound called efsevin which restored coordinated contractions in tremblor by binding to VDAC2, accelerating the transfer of calcium from intracellular stores into mitochondria, and restricting the temporal and spatial boundaries of calcium sparks in cardiomyocytes. The study showed that VDAC2-dependent mitochondrial calcium uptake has a critical modulatory role in the regulation of cardiac rhythmicity. Additionally, the study observed that defects in cardiac calcium handling and calcium overload contribute significantly to cardiac dysfunction and many types of arrhythmias. The findings suggest that efsevin targets a conserved calcium regulatory mechanism critical for maintaining rhythmic cardiac contraction in fish, mice, and humans. The authors identified VDAC2 as the protein target of efsevin.
The Dsc E3 ligase complex, which was previously thought to be Golgi-specific, has been found to regulate protein levels at three organelles, including Golgi, endosome, and vacuole. This was discovered through the identification of two novel Dsc subunits, named Gld1 and Vld1, which compete with each other to form two functionally independent Dsc subcomplexes. The Vld1 subcomplex takes the AP3 pathway to reach the vacuole membrane, whereas the Gld1 subcomplex travels through the VPS pathway and is cycled between Golgi and endosomes by the retromer. The Dsc complex can regulate protein quality control at three distinct organelles.
The article discusses the effects of the membrane-bound protease, Matriptase, on epithelial tissue in zebrafish hai1a mutants. Unrestricted Matriptase activity leads to epithelial inflammation and predisposes to carcinoma. The article maps the novel signaling cascades activated by Matriptase, identifying pathways that lead to inflammation and epithelial disruption. The study also found that calcium flashes, mediated by IP3R, activate Duox leading to excess H2O2 in hai1a mutants, causing inflammation. The authors propose that inhibition of Gq subunit in hai1a mutants rescues both inflammation and epithelial defects. The study has implications for tissue damage response and cancer progression.
The article describes the coordination of cell differentiation and morphogenesis in the Drosophila trachea during organogenesis. It is shown that tracheal morphogenesis and differentiation are separately induced, with trachealess being essential for maintaining the invaginated structure but dispensable for initiation. Trachealess expression starts in bipotential tracheal/epidermal placode cells and is maintained in the invaginated cells but is extinguished in the remaining sheet cells. A trachealess cis-regulatory module that shows both tracheal enhancer activity and silencer activity in the surface epidermal sheet was also identified. The article provides insight into how tracheal formation proceeds by two successive and genetically separable steps: 1) invagination triggered by the mechanical forces generated through the combined activities of mitosis, EGFR, and FGFR signaling; and 2) maintenance of the invaginated structure controlled by trachealess. The number of trachealess-expressing cells is tightly associated with the change from the epithelial sheet to the invaginated structure to ensure that only the invaginated cells are canalized robustly into the tracheal fate.
Plants use cyanogenic glucosides as a chemical defense against herbivores by releasing toxic hydrogen cyanide when their tissue is disrupted. However, some mite and lepidopteran species can still thrive on plants containing cyanogenic glucosides. The enzyme responsible for detoxifying HCN to β-cyanoalanine in arthropods has been identified as a member of the cysteine synthase family, which was horizontally transferred from bacteria to phytophagous mites and Lepidoptera. This gene was originally involved in sulfur amino acid biosynthesis in bacteria and was co-opted by herbivorous arthropods to detoxify plant-produced cyanide. The study also found that burnet moths rely on cyanogenic compounds and have evolved to not only sequester, but also synthesize them de novo.
Sensory hair cells in the ear use specialized ribbon synapses composed of Ribeye protein. Ca2+ influx through CaV1.3 channels is critical for hair cell synapse function and can impede ribbon formation. Mitochondrial Ca2+ (mito-Ca2+) has been found to be taken up adjacent to ribbons in mature zebrafish hair cells, coupling with presynaptic Ca2+ influx to confer proper presynaptic function and formation of the synapse. Changes in NAD+/NADH redox can impact Ribeye interactions and ribbon formation or impact ribbon-synapse function and stability. The researchers examined hair cells in the lateral-line system of zebrafish to study the impact of mito-Ca2+ and NAD (H) redox on ribbon synapses. They found mito-Ca2+ near ribbons and that presynaptic Ca2+ influx drives mito-Ca2+ uptake. CaV1.3 channels are the main source of Ca2+ entering the mitochondria. Their results suggest that presynaptic-Ca2+ influx and mito-Ca2+ uptake couple in hair cells to impact ribbon formation and function.
The mechanism of transport in TonB-dependent transporters (TBDTs) in Gram-negative bacteria is poorly understood. Researchers used pulse electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements in intact cells to study the Escherichia coli vitamin B12 transporter, BtuB, and found that substrate binding alters the C-terminal region of the core and shifts an extracellular substrate binding loop towards the periplasm. This structural transition is regulated by an ionic lock that is broken upon binding of the inner membrane protein TonB, and it is not observed when BtuB is reconstituted into phospholipid bilayers. The team had difficulty spin labelling some areas of the protein, but these they found changes in SB3 when vitamin B12 was added. The study demonstrates the importance of studying outer membrane proteins in their native environment and suggests an alternative to existing models of transport.
Researchers have developed a pipeline for the multi-scale reconstruction and quantitative morphological analysis of tissue architecture from microscopy images. The pipeline includes newly developed algorithms that address specific challenges of thick, dense tissue reconstruction and is applicable to various mammalian tissues, including liver, lung and kidney. The researchers applied the pipeline to the analysis of liver tissue and extracted quantitative parameters of sinusoids, bile canaliculi and cell shapes, recognizing different cell types with high accuracy. The platform also enabled them to uncover an unexpected zonation pattern of hepatocytes with different size, nuclei and DNA content, thus revealing new features of liver tissue organization. This pipeline is useful for the development of multi-scale models that describe and predict system behaviour under perturbed conditions.
A study examined the Longshanks selection experiment, where mice were selectively bred for longer tibiae relative to body mass over 20 generations. By integrating evolutionary theory, genome sequences, and molecular genetics, the study found that the selection response involved both polygenic adaptation and discrete loci of major effect, with the strongest loci tending to be selected in parallel between replicates. The study also found that selection may favor de-repression of bone growth through inactivating two limb enhancers of an inhibitor, Nkx3-2. The study highlighted the importance of understanding how populations adapt to a changing environment and the limitations of the infinitesimal model in explaining the rapid response to selection in mammals.
A study by researchers at McGill University in Canada has found that correlated neural activity enables the emergence of an invariant neural representation of natural stimuli that is most likely a neural correlate of perception. Research into weakly electric fish found that different patterns of input resulting from the same natural communication stimulus occurring in different contexts all gave rise to similar behavioral responses. The findings could help scientists to understand how the brain processes sensory input in order to generate behavioral responses.
Researchers have used Bayesian phylogenetic and machine learning approaches to analyse bacterial genome data in order to quantify the roles of badgers and cattle in the spread and persistence of bovine tuberculosis (bTB). The results suggest that transmission occurs more frequently from badgers to cattle than vice versa and that within-species transmission occurs at higher rates than between-species transmission for both. The findings suggest that control operations should target both cattle and badgers. The study used data from a high-density naturally infected badger population in southwest England, combined with whole genome sequences of selected cattle and badger isolates. Bayesian Structured coalescent Approximation (BASTA) was used to estimate the M. bovis inter-species transmission rates between the sampled badger and cattle populations.
The fruitless gene, which is known to control male courtship and mating behavior in insects, has also been found to control a module of female-specific blood-feeding behavior in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. The gene is sex-specifically spliced and encodes a BTB zinc-finger transcription factor that regulates cell identity, connectivity, and the functional properties of neurons in adulthood. Male mosquitoes, which do not feed on blood like females, also display a strong attraction to human hosts when the fruitless gene is removed, revealing the latent behavior. The gene's role in controlling sexually dimorphic behavior is conserved across insects, including mosquitoes, and has likely evolved to control new behaviors in specialist species.
Purple photosynthetic bacteria synthesize a novel photoreceptor called AerR, which uses cobalamin as a blue-light absorbing chromophore to control photosystem synthesis. AerR is translated as two isoforms that differ by 41 amino acids at the amino terminus, with the ratio of these isoforms affected by light and cell growth phase. The short AerR variant represses while the long variant activates photosynthesis genes, and the long form of AerR also activates genes involved in cellular metabolism and motility. The study shows that the long AerR variant converts CrtJ into an activator while the short AerR variant converts CrtJ into a repressor of photosystem gene expression. The L41 codon is found to function as a second start site for the SAerR isoform.
Red blood cells (RBCs) experience significant mechanical forces while circulating in the body, but the effects of these forces are not fully understood. Recent research has shown that gain-of-function mutations in mechanically activated Piezo1 cation channels are associated with the dehydrating RBC disease xerocytosis, suggesting a role of mechanotransduction in RBC volume regulation. In this study, it was found that RBCs exhibit robust calcium entry in response to mechanical stretch and that this entry is dependent on Piezo1 expression. Furthermore, RBCs from blood-cell-specific Piezo1 conditional knockout mice are overhydrated and exhibit increased fragility both in vitro and in vivo. Finally, it was shown that the chemical activator Yoda1 causes calcium influx and subsequent dehydration of RBCs via downstream activation of the KCa3.1 Gardos channel, directly implicating Piezo1 signaling in RBC volume control. Therefore, Piezo1 plays an essential role in RBC volume homeostasis.
Researchers have identified a transport and consumption pathway required for the growth of the cellulolytic fungus, Neurospora crassa, on hemicellulose which could expand the capacity of yeast to use plant cell wall-derived sugars, potentially increasing the efficiency of biofuel production. Previously, current industrial methods used harsh pretreatment of biomass which required large quantities of cellulase and hemicellulase enzyme cocktails to release monosaccharides from plant cell wall polymers, posing unsolved economic and logistical challenges.
The mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) is activated in animals in response to mitochondrial stress and is governed by two transcription factors, DVE-1 and ATFS-1. A study conducted on C. elegans has identified the small ubiquitin-like modifier-specific peptidase ULP-4 as a positive regulator of C. elegans UPRmt. Sumoylation affects the two transcription factors in the UPRmt transcriptional program in distinct ways. The study reveals a previously unexplored function of post-translational regulation in UPRmt signaling which promotes immune response and lifespan extension during mitochondrial stress. Animals respond to mitochondrial stress with the UPRmt, a surveillance program that initiates mitochondria-to-nucleus crosstalk to maintain mitochondrial protein-folding homeostasis and coordinates the expression of electron transport chain (ETC) components in mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. UPRmt signaling ultimately activates a transcriptional response governed by two transcription factors, ATFS-1 and DVE-1. ULP-4 is required to deSUMOylate DVE-1 and ATFS-1 to activate UPRmt in C. elegans. SUMOylation
RNA viruses suppress CpG and UpA dinucleotide frequencies in their genomes to avoid detection by host defense mechanisms, but the mechanism by which this occurs is still unknown. Researchers used echovirus 7 as a model to show that increasing CpG and UpA dinucleotide frequencies immediately after viral entry suppressed virus replication. The suppression was not due to effects on translation efficiency or induction of an antiviral state. Virus suppression appeared to occur due to host-cell intrinsic defense pathways that prevent replication of viruses with increased CpG and UpA frequencies and was found to occur in all tested cell types.
Indian Hedgehog (IHH) signaling is highly activated in cartilage and bone tumors, but its deletion in chondrocytes or osteoblasts does not cause tumor formation. A study using Prrx1+ mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) in mice found that deletion of Ptch1 in these cells promotes MSC proliferation and osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation, inhibits adipogenic differentiation, and leads to development of osteoarthritis-like phenotypes, enchondroma, and osteosarcoma. These tumors arise from Prrx1+ lineage cells and express low levels of osteoblast and chondrocyte markers, respectively. Mechanistically, Ptch1 deletion increases the expression of Wnt5a/6 and leads to enhanced β-catenin activation, and inhibiting Wnt/β-Catenin pathway suppresses development of skeletal anomalies including enchondroma and osteosarcoma. These findings suggest that cartilage/bone tumors arise from their early progenitor cells and identify the Wnt/β-Catenin pathway as a pharmacological target for cartilage/bone neoplasms.
Some bacteria have the ability to switch to a wall-free or “L-form” state which is poorly understood. Inhibition of peptidoglycan precursor synthesis promotes the generation of L-forms from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. L-forms generated have in common a mechanism of proliferation involving membrane blebbing and tubulation. This mode of proliferation is independent of the essential FtsZ based division machinery. The L-form mode of proliferation is conserved across the bacterial kingdom and could have been used in primitive cells, and opening up its use in the generation of synthetic cells.
The document discusses the rostrocaudal (head-to-tail) axis in vertebrates, which is supplied by progenitors at the caudal end of the embryo. The document focuses on neuromesodermal progenitors (NMPs) and their relationship to lateral/ventral mesoderm progenitors. The NMPs are a single entity that has the potential to generate either neural or mesodermal fate, depending on their position in the progenitor region. The choice of mesoderm fate is Wnt/β-catenin dependent. The research also investigated the plasticity and commitment of NMPs and lateral/ventral mesoderm progenitors and the mechanisms by which they choose between alternative fates. The findings of the research suggest that NM-fated cells in ≥E8.5 embryonic regions are not pluripotent but restricted in potency to neural and mesoderm fates, while lateral/ventral mesoderm-fated cells produce only mesoderm. The document also includes information on the spatiotemporal expression of Sox2 and T throughout axis elongation and their coexistence with NMPs.
In the retina, ganglion cells transmit visual information to the brain through spike trains. The most abundant ganglion cell type in mice, the W3 ganglion cell, responds selectively to movements of small objects, but it is not fully understood how this sensitivity arises. A study used 2-photon-guided patch-clamp recordings to investigate the responses of the vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGluT3)-expressing amacrine cells (ACs) to a range of visual stimuli. The researchers found that VGluT3-ACs detect object motion and provide selective excitatory input to W3 ganglion cells. Synaptic excitation in W3 ganglion cells was found to be diminished in mice lacking VGluT3. The study identifies VGluT3-ACs as object motion detectors in the retina.
The document discusses the challenges in estimating and controlling the spread of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in hospitals, as it can also be spread in the community. The authors develop an agent-based model to estimate MRSA transmission and infection importation rates in Swedish hospitals over a 6-year outbreak. The model identifies high-risk patients and interventions targeted at them lead to a significant improvement in controlling MRSA spread. The authors highlight the global concern of antimicrobial resistance, with MRSA being a leading cause of healthcare-associated infections. The model presents an effective, actionable, and cost-effective way to reduce MRSA transmission.
The accumulation of platelets in the liver contributes to acetaminophen-induced liver injury (AILI), but little is known about the molecular pathways involved in platelet recruitment to the liver and whether targeting such pathways could alleviate AILI. Researchers found that chitinase 3-like-1 (Chi3l1) played a critical role in hepatic platelet recruitment during AILI and that it signaled through CD44 on macrophages to induce podoplanin expression, which mediated platelet recruitment through C-type lectin-like receptor 2. The researchers generated anti-Chi3l1 monoclonal antibodies and demonstrated that they effectively inhibited hepatic platelet accumulation and AILI. These findings indicate that targeting Chi3l1 could be a potential therapeutic strategy for AILI.
The p53 tumor suppressor is known for its role in transcription, apoptosis, and cell cycle arrest, but it also plays a crucial role in replication-mediated genomic instability. Mutations in p53 can promote tumor progression and drug-resistance. Researchers have identified p53 as a keystone regulator of replication homeostasis within a DNA restart network that not only influences the genomic stability of cancer, but also impacts treatment resistance. The study found that p53 null and gain-of-function mutations exhibit defects in the restart of stalled or damaged DNA replication forks that drive genomic instability genetically separable from transcription activation. The findings establish replication homeostasis as a new therapeutic target for cancer treatment.
Mutations in the polycystin proteins PC-1 and PC-2 result in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and renal failure. The two proteins form a heteromeric ion channel complex enriched on primary cilia. However, technical hurdles have hindered a functional understanding of the polycystin complex. In this study, the polycystin complex was successfully reconstituted in mammalian cells, and it was shown that the N-terminal extracellular domain of PC-1 functions as an intrinsic agonist necessary for channel activation. The findings provide a mechanistic framework for understanding the role of the polycystin complex in ADPKD and suggest new therapeutic strategies.
The document outlines the importance of understanding the relationship between sequence and function in molecular biology and evolution. It specifically focuses on the joint sequence space of transcription factors (TFs) and the DNA response elements (REs) they recognize, and the role of epistasis (genetic interactions between sequence sites) in the evolution of molecular complexes. By functionally mapping the joint sequence space of an ancient TF protein and its DNA REs, the study found that epistasis was essential to specific TF-RE recognition and the evolution of a novel TF-RE complex with unique derived specificity. The study also highlights the complexity of protein-DNA interfaces and the importance of understanding them in order to understand gene regulation in biological processes.
Breathing in mammals relies on two distinct oscillators: the preBötzinger Complex (preBötC) for inspiration and the lateral parafacial region (pFL) for active expiration. To understand how these oscillators interact in anesthetized adult rats, the researchers hyperpolarized preBötC neurons and depolarized pFL neurons independently. They found that active expiration in rats is driven by the pFL but requires an additional form of network excitation, such as ongoing rhythmic preBötC activity or increased chemosensory drive. This discovery may have implications for other neural networks that contain multiple rhythm/pattern generators.
A study by scientists has found that control of speed versus accuracy in decision making may be exerted through changes in decision-related neural activity, rather than through changes in the threshold needed to terminate a decision. The study was carried out by recording neural activity in monkeys participating in a motion discrimination task in two speed-accuracy regimes. The researchers discovered that instead of terminating the decision process, the terminating threshold of neural activity was similar in both regimes, but evidence-independent activation from the beginning of decision formation was stronger in the faster regime. The study suggests that changes in neural activity itself mediate the speed-accuracy tradeoff in decision making.
The RAS pathway is important for maintaining the balance of the skin barrier and immune responses. Dysregulation of this pathway can lead to a range of skin disorders including atopic dermatitis. RAF kinases are actionable targets for regulating keratinocyte turnover, but chemical inhibitors can paradoxically activate the RAS pathway, promoting epidermal proliferation. In mice with compound epidermis-restricted BRAF/RAF1 ablation, a disease similar to human atopic dermatitis was observed, with skin inflammation and IgE responses. BRAF and RAF1 operate independently to balance MAPK signaling, with BRAF promoting ERK activation and RAF1 dimming stress kinase activation. The disease onset was prevented by JNK inhibition, while MEK/ERK inhibition caused similar phenotypes to those lacking RAF1 in the epidermis. Cutaneous toxicities are the main adverse effects of therapies targeting the RAS pathway, and reducing these side effects is a challenge for molecule-based therapy.
The article discusses how RNA polymerase II (Pol II) selects transcription start sites (TSSs) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae through a unidirectional scanning mechanism facilitated by the general transcription factor TFIIH and Ssl2, its yeast homolog. The article focuses on the role of Ssl2 in controlling scanning processivity, which determines the width of the scanning window for TSS selection. The article introduces "novel ssl2 alleles" that alter TSS selection by shifting the distribution of TSSs used at individual promoters. The article proposes two functional networks for determining TSS selection: one network involving Pol II and initiation efficiency, and the other involving TFIIH and scanning processivity. The article also discusses genetic interactions between different initiation factors and ssl2 alleles, which support the proposed model for promoter scanning initiation.
Researchers have used digital light projection to control the density of millions of genetically modified bacteria arranged into complex patterns. Bacteria were modified to swim smoothly and have their speeds controlled through light projection. Bacteria were able to be arranged into density patterns that morphed between complex shapes. The study involved the use of spatial light modulators to explore the mechanisms of photomovements in a homogeneous sea of freely swimming bacteria which can be used to achieve spatial and temporal control of cell concentration. The research highlights the potential for the use of bacteria as micropropellers in bio-hybrid micromachines.
The lack of efficient anti-coronavirus drugs has worsened the ongoing pandemic and there is a need for broad-spectrum antiviral drugs to target future outbreaks. Nucleotide analogs represent a powerful approach for this purpose, as they target the conserved coronavirus polymerase. Remdesivir is the only FDA-approved anti-coronavirus drug, and its efficient incorporation by the polymerase and probable evasion of proofreading machinery make it effective. However, efficient antiviral drugs are still lacking due to poor understanding of the mechanism of action of nucleotide analogs. The SARS-CoV-2 polymerase, comprising nsp12, nsp7, and nsp8, is the fastest RNA polymerase characterized to date. The elongation kinetics and product length of the polymerase are affected by 3′-dATP and RDV-TP, but the final product lengths remain largely unaffected. Magnetic tweezers assays can provide insights into the mechanism and efficacy of current and underexplored nucleotide analogs on the coronavirus polymerase.
Researchers studied non-motor decision making by recording intraoperative subthalamic nucleus (STN) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) electrophysiology as participants performed a novel task that required them to decide whether to encode items into working memory. They found that during all encoding trials, beta band (15-30 Hz) activity decreased in the STN and PFC, and this decrease was progressively enhanced as more items were stored into working memory. They also found that the STN and lateral PFC beta decrease was significantly attenuated during trials when participants were instructed not to encode the presented stimulus. These changes were associated with increased lateral PFC-STN coherence and altered STN neuronal spiking.
A eukaryotic leading/lagging strand replisome comprising 31 distinct polypeptides has been reconstituted. The research identifies a previously unknown process in bacterial replisomes. Pol ε is active with CMG on the leading strand, but it is unable to function on the lagging strand, even when Pol δ is not present. Conversely, Pol δ-PCNA is the only enzyme capable of extending Okazaki fragments, in the presence of Pols ε and α. CMG is responsible for the suppression mechanisms that spatially controls polymerase occupancy at the fork. The study demonstrates a 31 protein system with Pols α, ε, and δ, which performs both leading and lagging strand synthesis and generates Okazaki fragments of a size similar to those observed in cells. Multiple suppression reactions exist that prevent the activity of a polymerase positioned on the 'wrong' strand, and the only active solution is the asymmetric Pol ε/δ leading-lagging strand replisome with use of Pol α to prime the strands.
Schistosomes are parasitic flatworms that infect hundreds of millions of people and alternate between asexual reproduction in molluscan hosts and sexual reproduction in mammalian hosts. The stem cells in Schistosoma mansoni provide a potential source for developmental plasticity; however, the relationship between stem cells from different life-cycle stages remains unclear, as does the origin of the germline required for sexual reproduction. A study by researchers at the Stowers Institute for Medical Research shows that subsets of larvally derived stem cells are likely sources of adult stem cells and the germline. They also identified a novel gene that serves as the earliest marker for the schistosome germline.
Histone acetyl transferases (HATs) have diverse roles in cellular processes and are often dysregulated in cancers. This study investigated the regulatory potential of MYST1-containing MSL and NSL complexes in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and neuronal progenitors. The study found that both complexes influenced transcription through targeting promoters and enhancers. The MSL complex is important for mammalian X chromosome regulation, specifically regulating Tsix, the major repressor of Xist lncRNA. The NSL complex provides additional, Tsix-independent repression of Xist genes by maintaining pluripotency. Thus, the two complexes work synergistically to repress X inactivation in ESCs. This study also provided insights into the behavior of MSL and NSL complexes during differentiation from ESCs to neuronal progenitor cells. Genomic binding profiles for MSL1, MSL2, KANSL3, MCRS1, and MOF were generated, revealing distinct and shared binding sites for MOF and its complexes. Overall, the study shed light on the intricate interplay between MSL and NSL complexes and how they orchestrate gene expression in cells.
A protein called angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) appears to play an important role in directing fatty acids to brown adipose tissue (BAT) during cold exposure, according to a new study. ANGPTL4 is highly expressed in BAT, and the study has shown that down-regulation of the protein during cold enhances lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity and uptake of plasma triglyceride-derived fatty acids, while up-regulation in white adipose tissue blocks the cold-induced increase in LPL activity. BAT is activated when the body needs to maintain core body temperature in cold conditions. ANGPTL4 may thus help ameliorate cardio-metabolic risk, and is increasingly being studied as a potential approach to this end.
The study investigates basal translational readthrough (BTR) in humans, which occurs when ribosomes continue translating beyond the stop codon, resulting in synthesis of C-terminally extended proteins. The researchers used a new regression model to estimate the readthrough propensity (RTP) of all stop codon contexts and identified a nucleotide consensus motif for high RTP. They also analyzed all readthrough extensions in silico with a new predictor for peroxisomal targeting signal type 1 (PTS1). The study identified lactate dehydrogenase B (LDHB) as the highest combined RTP and PTS1 probability, resulting in at least 1.6% of total cellular LDHB being targeted to the peroxisome, where it is involved in the regeneration of redox equivalents for peroxisomal β-oxidation. The researchers used a dual reporter assay to test various candidate transcripts with high, intermediate, and low RTP, validating their model and showing that the aminoglycoside antibiotic geneticin could increase readthrough in their model. The study expands on our understanding of BTR in humans and its potential physiological role.
A team of researchers has created the first ever structure of a complex made from a human protein and the HIV virus.Proteins from human genes are responsible for expressing instructions that are written in DNA molecules. DNA replication is a critically important process for cellular growth and development, and defects in genes can lead to many diseases, including cancer. Many genetic diseases are caused by mutations in some of the proteins that make up the P-TEFb complex. The P-TEFb protein is essential for the proper function of RNA polymerase II, the enzyme that makes RNA molecules from DNA templates. In order to study the structure of the P-TEFb complex, the researchers studied a protein that is closely related to it, called the SEC. The SEC protein is very similar to P-TEFb, and the researchers found that it helped them to understand how the P-TEFb complex is put together. They also discovered that the HIV virus can interact with the P-TEFb complex, and that this interaction is very important for the way that the virus is able to infect human cells.
Scientists have discovered a new candidate phylum of bacteria called Melainabacteria, which are closely related to Cyanobacteria, the bacteria that were responsible for oxygenating the atmosphere billions of years ago. The researchers used whole genome reconstruction techniques to study the bacteria in human faecal matter and an aquifer sediment, and found that the new bacteria were similar to Cyanobacteria in their early evolutionary history when they did not contain photosynthetic abilities. The study suggests that the Cyanobacteria evolved from Melainabacteria, which thrives in anoxic environments such as the human gut, the only known habitat for the new bacteria.
Researchers have used the Drosophila melanogaster larval neuromuscular junction as a genetic system to understand the mechanisms responsible for the different presynaptic release probabilities, which occur across neurons. They found that the decoy soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) Tomosyn is differentially expressed in two types of glutamatergic motoneurons, the tonic-like Ib and the phasic-like Is. The presence of Tomosyn suppresses synaptic vesicle (SV) fusion and releases during sustained stimulation, generating low levels of SV fusion and sustained synaptic fatigue. In contrast, phasic release dominates when Tomosyn is absent, resulting in a quickly depleted releasable SV pool, rapid synaptic depression, and reduced capacity for presynaptic potentiation. Tomosyn is highly conserved with other Tomosyn proteins and forms a complex with the t-SNAREs Syx1A and SNAP-25. Drosophila Tomosyn shares conserved features with mammalian counterparts, and Tomosyn homologs from both species suppress neurotransmitter release. Critical domains within Tomosyn that mediate suppression of SV release may be the SNARE motif and the scaffold domain.
In a study of Drosophila, researchers have identified a zinc-finger transcription factor called Hindsight (Hnt) that is responsible for regulating follicle competency for ovulation. Providing evidence that Hnt plays an essential role in priming follicles to rupture, the study shows how Hnt upregulates matrix metalloproteinase 2 (Mmp2) expression in posterior follicle cells, which is essential for breaking down the follicle wall, and Oamb expression in all follicle cells – the receptor for receiving adrenergic signaling and inducing Mmp2 activation. The article also describes the mechanism behind ovulation in Drosophila and reveals how local adrenergic signaling suggests a similar regulation in mammalian ovulation, with the potential for Hnt/RREB-1 to play a conserved role in regulating follicle rupture/ovulation.
The study focuses on identifying proteins that mediate the process of mitophagy, in which damaged mitochondria are selectively eliminated. The researchers found that TBC1D15, a mitochondrial Rab GTPase-activating protein, and Fis1 work together to control the shape of autophagosomes during mitophagy, while Mff and DRP1 play a role in regulating both mitochondria and peroxisome morphology. The absence of either Fis1 or TBC1D15 causes excessive accumulation of YFP-LC3 during mitophagy, indicating that they are involved at the same step in autophagy. The study also demonstrates that TBC1D15 and TBC1D17 mediate proper autophagic encapsulation of mitochondria by regulating Rab7 activity at the interface between mitochondria and isolation membranes.
A study has challenged the traditional view that calcium spikes triggered by a climbing fiber input to Purkinje cells are all-or-nothing and only signal whether the instructive stimulus has occurred. The study found that these spikes contain analog information that encodes the strength of instructive stimuli trial-by-trial. CF inputs play a key role in theories of cerebellar learning by providing a teaching signal that sounds the alarm when an unexpected stimulus is encountered. The study imaged PC dendrites of awake mice to investigate how CF-triggered calcium events encode information about the strength of an instructive stimulus. They found that individual CFs encode information about stimulus intensity probabilistically across repeated presentations of the stimulus.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular mechanism that regulates protein synthesis and processing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The UPR is activated by ER stress and is mediated by three ER-to-nucleus signaling pathways named PERK, ATF6, and IRE1. Researchers have shown that the murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) uses the IRE1-XBP1 pathway of the UPR to regulate its own life cycle. MCMV activates the IRE1-XBP1 pathway early post infection to relieve repression by XBP1u, which inhibits viral gene expression and replication. MCMV has evolved means to modify the UPR by inducing PERK activation, increasing expression of the ER chaperone BiP, and downregulating IRE1 levels and inhibiting IRE1 signaling at late times post infection. The researchers also showed that IRE1 is necessary for efficient replication of MCMV, and that the RNase activity of IRE1 is required for efficient MCMV replication.
Centrosomes are important for proper cell division, and in particular the two centrioles within each centrosome play a critical role. When primary microcephaly (MCPH) occurs, an individual's brain development is stunted, making understanding the proteins involved in centriole biogenesis essential. A recent study found that CDK5RAP2, CEP152, WDR62, and CEP63 - all proteins associated with MCPH - interact with each other by way of a hierarchy, and also interact with satellite proteins that promote centriole duplication. The findings suggest that these proteins and satellites work together to regulate the centrosomal localization of CDK2, a cyclin-dependent kinase. Furthermore, when one enzyme in particular, CEP90, is mutated, MCPH may occur.
Mobile zinc is found in excitatory synapses and is co-released with glutamate. Previous studies have shown that synaptic zinc inhibits excitatory neurotransmission at low frequencies but enhances steady state synaptic responses during high frequencies. This study examined the effect of synaptic zinc on sound-evoked neuronal activity in the primary auditory cortex in awake mice. The results showed that synaptic zinc enhanced the gain of sound-evoked responses in CaMKII-expressing principal neurons but reduced the gain of parvalbumin- and somatostatin-expressing interneurons. The modulation was sound intensity-dependent and NMDA receptor-independent. Overall, the study reveals a novel modulator of cortical sound processing and provides new insights into auditory cortical processing mechanisms.
Researchers have identified the importance of cancer cell interferon-γ signaling in modulating Natural Killer (NK) cell activity, suggesting alternative immunotherapeutics may be effective in treating myeloid neoplasms. The CRISPR-Cas9 screens in leukemia cell lines identified disrupting the ubiquitin ligase substrate adaptor, DCAF15 as a viable treatment. The study also highlighted the need for therapies that can either increase MHC expression or work in an MHC-independent fashion, particularly as only a subset of cancer patients respond to T-cell checkpoint inhibitors. The study revealed the potential therapeutic utility of targeting the cullin4-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL4) substrate adaptor, DCAF15 in myeloid malignancies. As a result, there may be significant interest in developing NK-based cell therapies to amplify NK responses to cancers.
The global extinction risk for sharks, rays, and chimaeras (collectively known as chondrichthyans) has been evaluated for the first time, with the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species used as the basis of the analysis. The results reveal that one-quarter of chondrichthyan species are now at threat of extinction, with large-bodied, shallow-water species at the greatest risk. Overall chondrichthyan extinction risk is now higher than for most other vertebrates. Urgent action is required to better manage fisheries and trade to promote population recovery and avoid further extinctions. Improved management is also required to tackle the lucrative, but largely unregulated, global trade in shark and ray fins which is now one of the most valuable seafood commodities.
The spliceosome is a molecular machine that excises introns from pre-mRNAs. The spliceosome is composed of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and accessory proteins. Spliceosomal activation involves rearrangement of subunits to form an active site, but how this rearrangement is coordinated is not well-understood. In this study, researchers used multi-wavelength colocalization single molecule spectroscopy to directly observe the key events in Saccharomyces cerevisiae spliceosome activation. The data reveal the activation mechanism and show that overall splicing efficiency may be maintained through repeated rounds of disassembly and tri-snRNP reassociation.
The document discusses the challenge of quantifying the impact of environmental conditions and host community structure on disease, especially in the face of climate and biodiversity changes. The study looks at foliar disease symptoms in herbaceous plant communities along an elevational gradient and finds that increasing temperature associated with lower elevation can directly and indirectly increase disease. The indirect effect occurs through altered host community structure and the relationship between host traits and parasite transmission. The study highlights the need to consider both biotic and abiotic drivers to predict disease risk in the face of climate change. The elevational gradient allowed the study to explore associations among abiotic factors and biodiversity while minimizing confounding factors. The study also found that species richness increased with elevation and as soil surface temperature declined.
Homo naledi is a newly discovered extinct species of hominin found in the Dinaledi Chamber of the Rising Star cave system in South Africa. The skeletal remains of at least 15 individuals were found, with body mass and stature similar to small-bodied human populations but smaller endocranial volume similar to australopiths. The cranial morphology is unique but most similar to early Homo species. The foot and lower limb exhibit human-like characteristics but the trunk, shoulder, pelvis, and proximal femur are more primitive or australopith-like. The remains represent a single species and not a commingled assemblage, and the geological age is not yet known. The cranium of H. naledi differs from other hominin species such as Australopithecus, Homo habilis, Homo erectus, Homo rudolfensis, and Homo floresiensis. The dentition is generally small and simple in occlusal morphology.
Insulin-like peptides are important for biological processes, but their regulation is not fully understood. This study found that neprilysin activity regulates the expression of these peptides in fruit flies. Alterations in neprilysin expression led to reduced food intake and body size, as well as changes in metabolite composition. The study also identified novel substrates of the neprilysin enzyme and suggests that this mechanism is conserved in higher eukaryotes and humans. The study provides insights into the physiological and developmental roles of neprilysin and the regulation of insulin-like peptides.
A study on four migratory shorebird species spanning a range of body masses has identified a non-dimensional spacing rule for flock alignment, which scales linearly with wingspan but is independent of nearest neighbor distance and neighbor species. The flock structure is termed the compound-V formation, which is an intermediary between the cluster flocks of starlings and the simple-V formations of geese and other large migratory birds. The study proposes that this formation represents an adaptation for aerodynamic flocking in migratory species and that ecology is an underappreciated driver of the evolution of avian flocking behavior. The flock structure was examined using three approaches, including identifying local interaction rules, quantifying the degree of spatial structure, and measuring individual speeds and wingbeat frequencies to examine how position within the flock affects flight behavior. The study proposes that this formation could have evolved for aerodynamic flocking in migratory species and that the ecology of these species is an underappreciated driver of the evolution of avian flocking behavior.
The acidic patch of nucleosomes plays a critical role in regulating the activity of chromatin remodeling enzymes, according to a study by researchers at the University of California, San Francisco. The tiny structures enable DNA to fit into the nucleus and remodelers play essential roles in many processes including transcription, DNA replication and DNA repair. Remodelers have family-specific autoinhibitory motifs that bind to nucleosomal epitopes, thought to relieve the inhibitory effect through conformational change, though the details are unclear. However, remodeling enzymes can interact with a conserved acidic patch formed by histones H2A and H2B on the top surface of the nucleosome. The study used a mutant version of SNF2h and found that the acidic patch activates SNF2h by relieving autoinhibition mediated by two conserved domains of ISWI enzymes. The results highlight the broad and essential role the acidic patch plays in chromatin regulation.
Transfer RNA (tRNA) shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm and its localization is regulated by nutrient conditions. Its import machinery has not been well understood, but now Ssa2p, a major cytoplasmic Hsp70 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been identified as a tRNA-binding protein whose deletion compromises nuclear accumulation of tRNAs upon nutrient starvation. Ssa2p also binds Nup116, one of the yeast nucleoporins. Such Ssa2p-mediated tRNA import likely contributes to quality control of cytosolic tRNAs. 


Cystic fibrosis patients are prone to recurring bacterial infections in the lungs due to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). This can cause complications including immunosuppression and the need for antibiotic treatment which can prolong life but not cure the disease. Staphylococcus aureus is a common cause of lung infection in CF patients and produces sphingomyelinase (SMase) C, which can inhibit the activity of CFTR and voltage-gated K+ channels in lymphocytes. SMase C can also suppress host immunity and evade live vaccines. Tannic acid, a natural product, has been shown to antidote the actions of SMase C. Mutations in CFTR cause a variety of diseases, and the severity of lung disease is poorly correlated with genotype. Early control of infections is critical for limiting the negative impact of the disease, which determines patient prognosis and causes the majority of morbidity and mortality.
The document discusses how the motor system prepares for movements well in advance of their execution, with the nervous system making decisions about the optimal response to a stimulus during a period of planning. It is unclear how downstream motor networks differentiate activity related to movement preparation from the command to execute one. The study tested whether preparatory neural activity in premotor neurons of the primate superior colliculus has “motor potential” and whether it has features indicative of a hidden movement command. The results suggest that reaching a fixed threshold level is not a necessary condition for movement initiation, bringing into question current saccade generation models and supporting the possibility of a concurrent representation for movement preparation and generation. The study used the trigeminal blink reflex to remove inhibition on the saccadic system, triggering saccades at earlier-than-normal latencies, to demonstrate the motor potential of preparatory activity in the activity of the superior colliculus.
Researchers have studied how different subdivisions of the midbrain periaqueductal gray (PAG) are involved in behavioural responses to respiratory disease, such as the sensation of breathlessness. The PAG has previously only been considered as a single entity in human research, but is known to play an important role in the integrative response to breathlessness, with major cortical inputs. The researchers conditioned 18 healthy subjects to associate shapes with certain or uncertain impending respiratory load and scanned them during anticipation and application of inspiratory loading using 7 T functional MRI. Results showed activity in the ventrolateral PAG during anticipation of resistive loading, with activity in the lateral PAG during resistive loading, revealing spatially and temporally distinct functions within this structure. The researchers propose that lPAG is involved with sensorimotor responses to breathlessness, while the vlPAG operates within the threat perception network for impending breathlessness.
Histone ubiquitylation is crucial for the response to DNA double-strand breaks, and the RNF168 ubiquitin ligase plays a key role in orchestrating this response. RNF168 recruits other repair factors to the chromatin at break sites through ubiquitylation, but how it recognizes ubiquitylated chromatin is unknown. In this study, researchers used solution NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations to generate an atomic resolution model of human RNF169 binding to a ubiquitylated nucleosome, and validated it using electron cryomicroscopy. They found that RNF169 binds to ubiquitylated H2A-Lys13/Lys15 by using its canonical ubiquitin-binding helix and a pair of arginine-rich motifs that interact with the nucleosome acidic patch. They also identified additional proteins that specifically recognize H2AK13/K15ub in the context of nucleosomes.
The document discusses how two pioneer transcription factors, Zelda and GAGA Factor (GAF), are essential for the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) during early embryonic development in Drosophila melanogaster. The MZT requires coordination of multiple pioneer-like factors such as Zelda and GAF to activate widespread zygotic transcription and to remodel the chromatin accessibility landscape. The study used ChIP-seq to identify the genomic regions occupied by GAF during the MZT and found that GAF binding is established prior to widespread zygotic gene activation and remains relatively unchanged during early development. The study concludes that the global reprogramming of the zygotic genome for transcriptional activation requires cooperative functioning of pioneer transcription factors such as Zelda and GAF.
Researchers have developed a circuit-inspired model of retinal ganglion cell computation which accurately predicts spike responses and contrast adaptation. This novel nonlinear modeling framework is based on recordings of excitatory synaptic input and spiking output in the in vitro mouse retina. The ON-Alpha ganglion cells were selected for study because they could be targeted routinely and have a spiking response that is predominantly mediated by synaptic excitation. The model accurately predicted spikes with unprecedented millisecond precision and accurately described contrast adaptation of the spike train, revealing that retinal circuitry upstream of the ganglion cell generates contrast adaptation and temporal precision in ON-Alpha ganglion cell spike responses but further transformation occurs between currents and spikes.
A recent study published in the eLife journal has suggested a link between gut microbiota and visceral pain. In the experiments, germ-free mice were used to assess visceral sensitivity, spinal cord gene expression and pain-related brain structures. Germ-free mice displayed visceral hypersensitivity accompanied by increased gene expression of Toll-like receptor and cytokines in the spinal cord before being normalised by postnatal colonization from microbiota. The study supports a growing body of evidence for an association between the gut microbiota and visceral nociception.
Dynein-2 is responsible for retrograde transport in cilia and flagella, and mutations in dynein-2 components cause skeletal ciliopathies. Dynein-2 contains a heterodimer of two non-identical intermediate chains, WDR34 and WDR60, and each intermediate chain has a distinct role in cilium function. Loss of function of dynein-2 leads to defects in transition zone architecture, as well as intraflagellar transport. Defects in cilia are linked to many human diseases, known collectively as ciliopathies. Cilia are particularly important to ensure correct Shh signaling during embryonic development. In this study, the authors used engineered knockout cell lines for WDR34 and WDR60 to better understand the role of dynein-2 in human cells. They found that WDR34 is required for cilia extension while WDR60 is not. Loss of either IC results in defects in ciliary transition zone assembly and/or maintenance.
Researchers studied how mechanical force regulates calcium signaling in human mesenchymal stem cells, focusing on how subcellular organelles respond to external mechanical stimuli. They found that without extracellular calcium, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium release is the source of intracellular calcium oscillations induced by laser-tweezer-traction at the plasma membrane. This ER calcium release upon mechanical simulation is mediated by both the mechanical support of cytoskeleton and actomyosin contractility and mechanosensitive calcium permeable channels on the plasma membrane, specifically TRPM7. However, calcium influx at the plasma membrane via mechanosensitive calcium permeable channels is only mediated by passive cytoskeletal structure but not active actomyosin contractility. Active actomyosin contractility is essential for the response of ER to external mechanical stimuli, so mechanical factors play crucial roles in both development and tissue regeneration from stem cells.
A study has been conducted on neuronal activity in the pre-Bötzinger complex, which generates the inspiratory phase of breathing in mammals. Mixed-mode oscillations (MMOs) have been observed in this region, characterized by alternating large amplitude and small amplitude bursts. The study demonstrates with two computational models that MMOs emerge in a heterogeneous neural network due to progressive neuronal recruitment and synchronization, depending on the distributed neuronal excitability, density and weights of network interconnections, and cellular properties underlying endogenous bursting. The study highlights a new mechanism by which heterogeneity leads to complex dynamics in rhythmic neuronal populations. The study also predicts that MMO patterns should be attainable in a wide range of brain structures with rhythmic activity depending on mechanisms for neuronal synchronization. The experiments were focused on computational models of a neuron population in the pre-Bötzinger complex (pre-BötC). The study has important implications for understanding how heterogeneity of neural excitability and other network features contribute to the generation of rhythmic activities in neuron populations that are key components of central pattern generators in vertebrates.
Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco have been able to identify how certain calcium-activated chloride channels (CaCCs) work. They found that direct binding of calcium to the protein in question, known as TMEM16A, triggers channel activation independently of calmodulin. This work was conducted by conducting a comprehensive alanine mutagenesis screen and four experiments to test their hypotheses. The discovery is particularly important as CaCCs are involved in a wide range of physiological activities, including fluid secretion in epithelia and the regulation of membrane excitability in neurons.
The paper explores the interaction between disease-microbiome associations and aging by analyzing gut microbiome differences across five major diseases in a multi-cohort dataset of more than 2500 individuals aged 20 to 89. The study shows that disease-microbiome associations display specific age-centric trends, and that aging-associated microbiome alterations towards a disease-like configuration occur in colorectal cancer patients, masking disease signatures. The study identified a microbiome disease response shared across multiple diseases in elderly subjects that is distinct from that in young/middle-aged individuals, as well as a novel set of taxa consistently gained in disease across all age groups. A subset of these taxa was associated with increased frailty in subjects from the ELDERMET cohort. The study concludes that identifying the specificity of these alterations is necessary for developing microbiome-based diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
A study has used single-cell RNA sequencing coupled with in situ hybridization to identify the chromatin remodeler Hmga1 as a regulator of neural crest development. The study found that Hmga1 is highly expressed before neural crest specification and maintained in migrating chick neural crest cells. CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockouts showed that Hmga1 has two distinct functions in neural crest development: regulating Pax7-dependent neural crest lineage specification at the neural plate border and reducing cranial crest emigration from the dorsal neural tube independent of Pax7 at premigratory stages. This second role is due to Hmga1's function as a canonical Wnt activator. The study also identified several other genes, including transcriptional regulators, expressed in migrating neural crest cells.
A new mutant mouse (lamb1t) has been discovered that exhibits intermittent dystonic hindlimb movements and postures when awake, and hyperextension when asleep. It has co-contraction of opposing muscle groups and is indicative of brain and spinal cord interaction. It is dominant and caused by the Lamb1 gene. The mutant mouse is a new model for testing how dysfunction in the CNS causes specific abnormal movements and postures. Dystonia involves sustained or intermittent muscle contractions causing abnormal, often repetitive movements, postures or both. Dystonia is a circuit disorder involving various brain regions, including sensory input, premotor and motor cortex, striatum and globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and parts of the thalamus, cerebellum, and the tracts connecting them. The lamb1t mouse has parallels with dystonia, but also has symptoms exposed by sleep and anesthesia, and these led to the demonstration that there are circuit abnormalities in the spinal cord. Six motor skill tests were applied to the mice, and lamb1t mice exhibited many more hindlimb slips, stayed on the rotarod for less time, and were slower when swimming down the Olympic pool lane.
The Hippo signaling pathway regulates tissue growth in fruit flies by using Yorkie (Yki) as a transcriptional coactivator. The exact mechanism by which Yki activates the target gene is not known, but it is believed to be through its interaction with other proteins. This study shows that Nuclear receptor coactivator 6 (Ncoa6), a subunit of Trithorax-related (Trr) histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methyltransferase complex, is a Yki-binding protein that is required for Hippo-mediated growth control and target gene expression. By artificially tethering Ncoa6 to Sd, the study finds that Ncoa6 is sufficient to promote tissue growth and Yki target gene expression in the absence of Yki. It is found that Yki functions as a transcriptional coactivator by recruiting a H3K4 methyltransferase and altering the chromatin state of target genes
The motor protein SpoIIIE is responsible for completing chromosome segregation in bacteria. This study used a single-molecule approach to investigate how SpoIIIE translocates on DNA. They found that SpoIIIE makes critical electrostatic contacts with the phosphate backbone on the 5'→3' strand in the direction of translocation and makes a 2 bp step per ATP hydrolyzed. The study proposes a two-subunit escort translocation mechanism that can track one DNA strand and bypass inactive subunits without arrest. The study also explored how SpoIIIE interacts with DNA and found that the motor can traverse dsMeP inserts of 2 bp, 3 bp, and 4 bp with near-100% probability, but traversal probability drops to ~50% for dsMeP inserts of 5 bp or longer. The study proposes two hypothetical mechanisms for how DNA is handed off from subunit to subunit during translocation.
Researchers have developed a testing platform based on diverse induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) that can determine susceptibility to life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias caused by drugs. The study was based on a genetic panel of iPSCs that mimic responses to drug-induced long QT syndrome, a major cause of cardiac arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. The researchers identified key genes implicated in susceptibility to a common beta-blocker used to treat cardiac arrhythmias. The findings may help in the development of iPSC-based assays for the testing of individual drug reactions.
The article discusses the idea of using evolutionary trade-offs, specifically collateral sensitivity, to combat antibiotic resistance in pathogens. Collateral sensitivity refers to the evolution of resistance to one antibiotic causing hypersensitivity to another. The article outlines an experiment using Pseudomonas aeruginosa to test the stability and clinical utility of this trade-off. Results showed that sometimes the bacterial population failed to counter hypersensitivity and went extinct, while other times hypersensitivity evolved into multidrug resistance. However, resistance gains frequently caused re-sensitization to the previous drug, thus maintaining the trade-off. The drug order affected the evolutionary outcome, likely due to variation in the effect size of collateral sensitivity, epistasis among adaptive mutations, and fitness costs. The study suggests that drug order can determine treatment efficacy, enhance or minimize multidrug resistance, and lead to a re-sensitization towards the first drug in the surviving populations. The article concludes that robust genetic trade-offs and drug-order effects can help guide the design of evolution-informed antibiotic therapy.
The fission yeast NDR kinase Orb6 has a function in the negative regulation of RNA-binding protein Sts5 recruitment into RNP (ribonucleoprotein) particles to promote polarized cell growth. Many Sts5-bound mRNAs encode essential factors for polarized cell growth, and Orb6 kinase spatially and temporally controls the extent of Sts5 granule formation. This mechanism of control prevents the degradation of mRNAs encoding proteins important for polarized cell growth and cell morphogenesis during exponential cell growth and promotes morphological adaptation during nutritional stress. The loss of Orb6 kinase activity leads to cell separation defects and slow growth in addition to polarity defects. Understanding the conserved mechanisms by which cells tune polarized cell growth has implications for studies of neuronal cell morphogenesis, neurodegenerative diseases, stem cell differentiation, and cancer.
Researchers have identified three potassium channels (KCNQ5, KCNN4, and KCNK5) that positively modulate the translocation of cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) into cells through direct translocation. The modulated channels decrease the transmembrane potential (Vm), leading to megapolarization and triggering the formation of water pores used by CPPs to enter cells. The study provides the first genetic validation of the role of Vm in CPP translocation and characterizes the diameter of the water pores used by CPPs to enter live cells. The findings suggest new strategies for improving CPP-linked cargo delivery for therapeutic or experimental purposes.
The article discusses the role of energy consumption in ATP-driven molecular chaperones called 70-kDa Heat shock proteins. These proteins protect cells against proteins that could potentially cause harm by folding incorrectly, and play various crucial roles in healthy cellular functioning. The article establishes a link between the non-equilibrium state of these proteins, due to ATP hydrolysis, and their high affinity for substrates. When energy is consumed, the dissociation constant of the chaperone-substrate complex can decrease significantly. The article looks at how ATP hydrolysis and substrate binding and release relate to each other, exploring the various exchange rates for these actions. The article shows that there is a non-equilibrium dissociation constant that is distinct from the equilibrium dissociation constant, which can be lowered by several orders of magnitude due to ultra-affinity.
The regulation of rod gene expression may be a potential treatment for retinal degenerative diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The study reports the discovery of a compound named Photoregulin3 (PR3), which inhibits rod photoreceptor gene expression by modulating Nr2e3. The study demonstrates the effectiveness of PR3 as a therapeutic strategy for RP in RhoP23H mice by showing significant preservation of retinal structure and function. The study also explains the molecular mechanisms behind PR3's interaction with Nr2e3 and its effects on rod gene expression. Studies have identified several transcription factors that regulate photoreceptor gene expression, and loss of function mutations in these factors cause a changed identity of rods. The study supports the idea that pharmacological modulation of rod gene expression offers a potential strategy for treating RP.
This article discusses the role of the protein Wapl in regulating cohesin, a complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion during the cell cycle. Specifically, the article explores how Wapl influences meiotic cohesin complexes, which are involved in the process of meiosis, resulting in the production of haploid gametes. Using C. elegans as a model organism, the study demonstrates that Wapl regulates the binding of COH-3/4 kleisin cohesin complexes, but not REC-8, demonstrating the specificity of Wapl's activity. By restricting the amount of chromosome-associated COH-3/4, Wapl controls chromosome structure during meiotic prophase. The article also discusses the importance of proper establishment and release of sister chromatid cohesion, not only for the cell cycle but also for successful meiotic cell division. Finally, the study suggests that Wapl is a key regulator of chromatin organization and sister chromatid cohesion throughout the mitotic cell cycle.
Researchers have determined that gut bacteria can cause depressive-like behaviour in mice through interactions with genes. The study found that transfer of specific bacterial taxa was enough to change gene expression in the prefrontal cortex and induce social avoidance. The research demonstrates that the gut microbiota can alter the synthesis of metabolites affecting gene expression in the prefrontal cortex, thereby modulating social behaviour. The findings emphasise the need to define the role of environment/gene interactions in neuropsychiatric disorders. The study also highlights that psychiatric comorbidities often accompany conditions characterised by abnormal gut microbiota composition.
The dorsal striatum in the brain receives inhibitory input from the cortex through corticostriatal somatostatin neurons (CS-SOM), which affects the output of spiny projection neurons (SPN) and influences behavior. This previously unknown corticostriatal direct inhibitory circuit is characterized by GABAergic projections from the cortex to the dorsal striatum. By examining the functional effects of these projections using optogenetics, researchers found that a large proportion of striatal SPNs receive direct inhibitory input driven by CS-SOM neurons, which is important for movement, learning, and goal-directed behavior. The study also identified the connectivity pattern and physiological properties of CS-SOM neurons.
Research has found that small changes in the activity of Na/K pumps can regulate the internal release of calcium in cardiac myocytes via Na/Ca exchange. Conversely, transient increases in cytoplasmic calcium strongly regulate cardiac Na/K pumps. The study hypothesizes that Na/K pumps enter into long-lived inactive states when they are in E1 configurations, and that transient cytoplasmic Ca elevations may attenuate Na/K pump inactivation via membrane modifications mediated by lipid-modifying enzymes or by long-lived conformational changes of high-density membrane-associated proteins.
A study has found that seeing a speaker’s face enhances speech comprehension in challenging environments, and investigated the neural mechanisms underlying this phenomenon. Using MEG data, researchers found that visual cues arising from the speaker’s face enhanced functional connectivity between temporal and inferior frontal cortex, improving speech comprehension. The study also revealed multiple and distinct representations of acoustic and visual speech in the brain. The findings suggest that functional connectivity along the ventral pathway facilitates speech comprehension in multisensory environments.
Researchers have developed a modular automated platform for large-scale experiments, known as MAPLE, which is an organism-handling robot capable of conducting lab tasks and experiments. The platform can be used for a wide range of lab organisms, including yeast, nematodes, slime mold, bumblebees, and fruit flies. MAPLE can automate diverse assays in a wide variety of organisms, allowing large-scale experiments to take advantage of the many benefits lab model organisms offer. The system is relatively inexpensive and scalable, with a cost of approximately $3,500, and its bill of materials has been made public under open source licenses. The system can conduct numerous protocols for fruit flies, including loading of individual fruit flies for circadian rhythm experiments or collecting virgin female flies for genetic crosses. Handling by MAPLE did not damage fruit flies or introduce discrepancies compared to experiments conducted manually. The system is modular and has a large, flat experimental workspace with multiple flexibly-configurable experimental modules. Furthermore, the workspace is physically open for user convenience and transparent on the top and bottom for in situ optical phenotyping.
Researchers have discovered a new type of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) called Lnc34a that is responsible for colon cancer stem cell (CCSC) growth, indicating a further regulatory complexity in non-coding RNAs. The RNA directly targets the microRNA miR-34a by binding to it and causing its spatial imbalance which, in turn, affects CCSC self-renewal and colon cancer (CRC) growth in xenograft models. Lnc34a is upregulated in late-stage CRC and is associated with miR-34a silencing. The regulation of asymmetric vs. symmetric stem cell division is also explored.
Feedback inhibitory circuits may play a critical role in pattern separation across species. However, it is poorly understood how these feedback circuits may implement pattern separation of temporally structured input in mammals. In this study, researchers quantitatively determined the key properties of net feedback inhibition in the mouse dentate gyrus, a region involved in pattern separation. They found that feedback inhibition is steeply recruited with a low dynamic range and a non-uniform spatial profile. Furthermore, computational analyses showed that feedback inhibition had a significant contribution to pattern separation of theta modulated inputs, and it selectively boosted pattern separation at gamma frequencies, particularly for highly similar inputs. These findings suggest that frequency-dependent pattern separation is a key feature of the feedback inhibitory microcircuit in the dentate gyrus.
A simulation model of helical dynamin-membrane complexes was used to investigate the mechanical and functional consequences of dynamin shape changes and disassembly. The study found that dynamin helices were narrower in the presence of GTP and that elongation of the helix impeded fission, while coat disassembly assisted fission. The findings had several testable structural consequences and helped to reconcile conflicting aspects between the two main present models of dynamin fission. The study also emphasized the crucial role of an effective rotation of the filament around its longitudinal axis, which reflects alternate tilting of dynamin’s PH binding domains and creates a membrane torque.
The study investigates how the dopaminergic and opioidergic systems in humans affect implicit and explicit responses during the anticipation and consumption of rewards. Healthy volunteers were given either 400mg of the dopaminergic antagonist amisulpride, 50mg of the opioidergic antagonist naltrexone, or a placebo. Physical effort and facial reactions were recorded during reward anticipation and consumption of both social and non-social rewards. Results suggest that facial reactions during anticipated and experienced pleasure rely on partly different neurochemical systems and that the neurochemical bases for food and touch rewards are not identical. Facial reactions are a promising avenue for investigating the neurochemical regulation of reward processing in humans.
Charcot–Marie-Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A) is a childhood peripheral neuropathy caused by mutations in the mitochondrial fusion protein MFN2. There is currently no treatment available for this condition, which is managed with braces, wheelchairs, and social support. A new study has found that pharmacologically activating normal endogenous mitofusins using a small molecule called MiM111 can reverse hallmark mitochondrial stasis and fragmentation in reprogrammed human patient motor neurons and in mice expressing human MFN2 T105M. MiM111 treatment normalized CMT2A neuromuscular dysfunction, reversed pre-treatment axon and skeletal myocyte atrophy, and enhanced axon regrowth by increasing mitochondrial transport within peripheral axons and promoting in vivo mitochondrial localization to neuromuscular junctional synapses. This treatment could be the first pre-clinical candidate for CMT2A and has provided a powerful rationale for advancing mitofusin activators to first-in-human trials.
A study published in eLife identifies a previously unknown mechanism regulating the Ras family of GTPases, important in cell signalling and frequently mutated in human tumours. Researchers discovered that reversible lysine fatty acylation regulates R-Ras2, a member of the Ras family, and that tumour suppressor Sirtuin-6 (SIRT6) regulates the lysine fatty acylation of R-Ras2. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, SIRT6 knockout increased R-Ras2 lysine fatty acylation, promoting plasma membrane location of R-Ras2 and increased cell proliferation. The study establishes lysine fatty acylation as a previously unknown mechanism that regulates the Ras family of GTPases and provides an important tumor suppressing mechanism for SIRT6.
Purkinje cells (PCs) are output neurons of the cerebellar cortex that encode sensorimotor information. However, there has been a debate on how exactly they do this. A recent study found that PCs use a multiplexed spike code, where synchrony/spike time and firing rate encode different information in monkeys during saccadic eye motion tasks. The study also found that infrequent pause spikes provide a temporally reliable signal for eye motion onset, and are strongly phase-coupled to the beta/gamma band of the local field potential. This suggests that PC spike trains can simultaneously convey information necessary to achieve precision in both timing and continuous control of motion. The study re-examined the controversy surrounding the nature of PC's coding mechanism in achieving precision in both timing and control of motion by using a new approach that classified PC spikes into specific spike categories and correlated them with local network activity.
The development of cartilage in the skeletal system requires the transcription factor Sox9, which has wide-ranging roles in organogenesis outside of the skeletal system. The mechanisms by which Sox9 and other factors gain access to cartilage-specific regions during skeletal development were unknown. Through analyzing chromatin accessibility during the differentiation of neural crest cells into chondrocytes of the zebrafish head, researchers found that cartilage-associated chromatin accessibility is dynamically established. They found that Foxc1 promotes chondrogenesis in the face by establishing chromatin accessibility at a number of cartilage-associated gene enhancers. The majority of chondrocyte-specific elements gain accessibility after pharyngeal arch formation, and transcription factor binding motifs change during cartilage differentiation. Loss of Foxc1 results in widespread cartilage and bone defects, including impaired tracheal and rib cartilages, loss of calvarial bone, and disruption of endochondral bone maturation. Our analysis of Foxc1-dependent and -independent elements showed enrichment of Sox, Tead, Mtf, Ets, and Fox motifs, suggesting that these transcription factors play roles in cartilage development.
The article discusses a study that created a DNA methylation-based age predictor for a wild baboon population in Kenya. The study found that male dominance rank was the best predictor of deviations from chronological age, with high-ranking males predicted to be older than their true ages. The results suggest that achieving high rank may impose costs consistent with a "live fast, die young" life-history strategy. The study provides insight into the sources of variation in biological aging rates and the trade-offs that shape individual life-history strategies.
Researchers investigated the response of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to time-varying mechanosensory signals and found that the behavioral response is tuned to temporal properties of the signals. The animal’s response also depends on its behavioral context, and even in the same neurons, mechanosensory signals can be tailored to elicit different behavioral responses. The researchers developed a linear-nonlinear model that predicts the animal’s behavioral response to stimulus. The findings suggest that investigating how the nervous system processes sensory signals is critical to understanding neural function.
Septin proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae co-assemble into hetero-octamers, with two species of the octamer existing. The slow GTPase activity by Cdc12 directs the choice of incorporation of Cdc11 or Shs1, but many septins, including Cdc3, lack GTPase activity. Guanidine hydrochloride was found to rescue septin function in cdc10 mutants by promoting assembly of non-native Cdc11/Shs1–Cdc12–Cdc3–Cdc3–Cdc12–Cdc11/Shs1 hexamers, suggesting a reactivation of a latent septin assembly pathway. Guanidine was also found to suppress septin defects in mutants via a mechanism that does not involve Hsp104 or its homolog Hsp78. The results suggest that GdnHCl allows other Cdc3 molecules to co-assemble with Cdc11, Cdc12, and Shs1 into Cdc10-less hexamers capable of robust septin functions.
Individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) often exhibit cognitive and motor impairments and symptoms similar to autism. The cerebellum plays a key role in motor control, cognition, and social interaction, suggesting that cerebellar defects may contribute to NF1-associated neurodevelopmental disorders. In this study, the authors demonstrated that mutations to Nf1 specifically during early development negatively impact the Bergmann glia (BG) scaffold and produce ectopic unipolar brush cells (UBCs). This mutation disrupts the migration of granule cell (GC) and UBC precursors and thus disrupts neuronal lamination. Combining these findings with previous observations of motor and nervous system development regulation led the authors to propose a potential therapeutic strategy. As NF1 clinical patients were found to exhibit neuronal pathologies, those found to have cerebellar cell anomalies are proposed as optimal candidates for applications of transient MEK inhibition to reduce neurodevelopmental deficits.
Researchers have identified brain regions in humans that correspond to areas in rats involved in memory and spatial navigation. Using high-resolution imaging and data-driven and model-based analyses, the scientists identified sub-regions in the human brain and found a division primarily along the anteroposterior axis. The research could help translate findings from rodent studies to human studies, particularly in relation to Alzheimer's disease, which affects the entorhinal cortex where the disease's pathology starts.
The study aims to identify and track macrophage subtypes in live vertebrates, particularly in zebrafish. A transgenic line of zebrafish was created in which macrophages expressing the protein tumour necrosis factor alpha (tnfa), a key feature of classically activated (M1) macrophages, were tagged with fluorescent proteins. Using 4D confocal microscopy, the macrophages were observed to change phenotype during inflammation, from pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages to alternatively activated M2 macrophages. The study highlights the diversity and plasticity of zebrafish macrophage subsets and their similarities with mammalian macrophages. The study also emphasises the importance of tracking macrophage behaviour and phenotype in response to environmental challenges to gain a better understanding of their role in immune response, tissue repair, and disease progression.
The research explores how air-driven sound production changed in the secondarily aquatic frog genus Xenopus, when they returned to water to preserve essential acoustic information on species identity. Results suggest that sound production is due to mechanical excitation of laryngeal resonance modes following rapid separation of laryngeal arytenoid discs and is intrinsic to the larynx, rather than neuromuscular control. The resulting frequency resonance modes are a distinctive acoustic signature, providing information on species identity that could facilitate both conspecific localization and ancient species divergence. Dyads, two simultaneously produced frequency bands, are specific to each clade of Xenopus and reflect species-typical features. The generation of dyads is intrinsic to the larynx and is not influenced by extra-laryngeal tissues.
Macrophages play an important role in the immune response by destroying pathogens and secreting cytokines. However, they must differentiate between pathogenic and non-pathogenic stimuli to prevent inappropriate activation and tissue injury. Receptor clustering can help macrophages distinguish between strong and weak stimuli. This study investigated the role of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) and hemi-ITAMs in macrophage activation. The researchers compared signaling in the absence and presence of receptor clustering using a small-molecule inhibitor of Csk, which increased Src-family tyrosine kinase (SFK) activation. They found that receptor-independent SFK activation led to a downstream signaling blockade associated with rapid degradation of the SFK LynA. Inflammatory priming of macrophages upregulated LynA and promoted receptor-independent signaling. In contrast, clustering the hemi-ITAM receptor Dectin-1 induced signaling that did not require LynA or inflammatory priming. The basal-state signaling checkpoint regulated by LynA expression and degradation and the signaling reorganization initiated by receptor clustering allow cells to discriminate between pathogens and non-pathogens.
Spire1C is a protein that binds to INF2 and promotes actin assembly on mitochondrial surfaces, cooperating with the protein to regulate mitochondrial division. Spire1C is optimally positioned to serve as a molecular hub that links mitochondria to actin and the endoplasmic reticulum for regulation of mitochondrial division. This is essential for survival in mammals. The initial constriction of mitochondrial membranes is necessary for this process to occur, which is independent of Drp1 and occurs at ER-mitochondria intersection zones where ER tubules associate with and wrap around the mitochondrial outer membrane along the plane of mitochondrial division.
A study on mice highlighted the impact of antibiotics and microbial diversity on how patients metabolise drugs, specifically nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like indomethacin. The study revealed the composition of the mammalian gut microbiota is affected by exposure to NSAIDs, and that these interactions have implications for drug metabolism and toxicity. The research’s authors suggest that the results could lead to more personalised drug therapies based on an individual's microbiomic make-up, as well as opening up new avenues for combating drug toxicity. 
The role of astrocytes in mammalian behavior, particularly in contextual fear memory, is not well understood. To explore this, the researchers generated transgenic rats with astrocyte-specific ChR2 expression, allowing the specific activation of astrocytes in vivo by optogenetics. They found that after memory acquisition, astrocyte activation disrupted memory consolidation and persistently decreased contextual fear memory accompanied by reduced fear-related anxiety behavior. In vivo microdialysis experiments showed astrocyte photoactivation increased extracellular ATP and adenosine concentrations, and intracerebral blockade of adenosine A1 receptors reversed the attenuation of fear memory. These findings provide a deeper understanding of the astrocyte-mediated regulation of fear memory and suggest a new therapeutic strategy against pathological fear-related disorders.
Researchers have estimated the genome-wide mutation rate in Atlantic herring, the first such study in a teleost, which was chosen due to its suitability as a population genetic model system. Previously, low nucleotide diversity in this species, despite its enormous population size, has remained something of a paradox. The parent-offspring approach, which relies on using high-coverage whole-genome sequencing to detect differences between parents and their offspring, proved the preferred method for estimating the mutation rate in non-model organisms. The mutation rate was found to be the lowest among vertebrates, and only partially explained the paradox among Atlantic herring. What is required is more testing across the tree of life to draw general conclusions about the relationship between neutral diversity, effective population size and mutation rate.

The neural basis for corrective responses to limb disturbances is poorly understood. Somatosensory feedback is transmitted to many sensory and motor cortical regions within 25ms of a mechanical disturbance applied to the monkey’s arm. Neurological responses were examined in five different cortical regions associated with voluntary motor control within 100ms of perturbations. Perturbation related activity was seen in all cortical regions, but the magnitude varied with S1 being significantly larger than responses in all other areas. The onset time of perturbation-related activity arrived quickly in all cortical regions. Primary somatosensory cortex was the first to respond, premotor cortex was the last and A5 and M1 responded in between these extremes. Perturbation responses were altered when the animal was not engaged in a limb motor task.
A study has found that different parts of the hippocampus have specialized roles in controlling fear and anxiety. The
Researchers have discovered that human flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1) and related structure-specific 5’nucleases use a protein-DNA induced-fit mechanism that enables it to efficiently verify a substrate and suppress off-target cleavage. FEN1 efficiently and accurately identifies and incises aberrant DNA structures during replication, repair, and recombination to avoid genomic instability. The induced-fit substrate recognition sets up the catalytic selectivity of the nuclease active site for genome stability. The research helps to understand biological function, including the development potential cancer drugs.
The document discusses the use of trial-by-trial covariations between neural activity and perceptual decisions to understand how sensory neurons contribute to perceptual decisions. These covariations are measured using choice probability (CP), and the respective roles of correlated noise and selective decoding in creating CPs have been controversial. The document presents findings from biologically-constrained simulations that suggest selective decoding of neuronal signals plays an important role in shaping CPs across a population of sensory neurons. The simulations explore the peculiar pattern of CPs exhibited by multisensory neurons in area MSTd that represent self-motion. The findings suggest that correlated noise is essential to observe CPs, but selective decoding also plays an important role. The document provides details on the mathematical models used in the simulations and discusses the implications of the findings for understanding how sensory neurons contribute to perceptual decisions.
Researchers have identified two novel Bub1 inhibitors that can test the role of the catalytic activity of the kinase Bub1, which is involved in cell division. The inhibitors demonstrate potent Bub1 kinase inhibition in vitro and in intact cells, affecting chromosome association of Shugoshin and the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), but did not notably impact mitotic progression or spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) function. Bub1 kinase inhibition did impair chromosome arm resolution while simultaneously sensitising the cells to low doses of Paclitaxel, impairing chromosome segregation and cell proliferation. This offers a better understanding of Bub1 kinase function and its potential usefulness for therapeutic applications.
This study examined how the strength of stimulation impacts T cell signaling downstream of the TCR, and how this relates to transcriptional activation. The researchers used mass cytometry to simultaneously measure multiple signaling pathways during activation of murine CD8+ T cells, and found that stimulation strength dictates the rate with which cells initiate signaling through the network, rather than alter the program of signaling events leading to T cell activation. The study also showed that ligand potency determines the extent of signaling at various proximal and distal nodes, and that selective effects of IL2 on T cell signaling pathways exist. Overall, this study suggests that while TCR-induced signaling may be modulated in rate by stimulation strength, it remains coordinated and consistent in organization.
The PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that controls the expression of transposons and maintains genome integrity in animal gonads. In Drosophila, piRNA-guided silencing is achieved, in part, via co-transcriptional repression of transposons by Piwi. Panoramix (Panx) is a key TGS effector acting downstream of Piwi at the interface between the piRNA pathway and the general chromatin silencing machinery. Here it is shown that Nuclear Export Factor 2 (Nxf2) and its co-factor, Nxt1, form a complex with Panx and are required for co-transcriptional silencing of transposons in somatic and germline cells of the ovary. The evolution of transposon defense mechanisms involved exaptation of the nuclear RNA export machinery.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a key factor in aging and disease development. Various pathways have been identified in cells to maintain mitochondrial balance during times of stress or metabolic adaptation. Studies using yeast as a model system have identified a new degradation system that selectively removes membrane proteins from mitochondria while leaving the organelle intact. The system involves the sorting of pre-existing proteins into a mitochondrial-derived compartment (MDC) and release through mitochondrial fission and elimination by autophagy. This pathway requires the import receptors Tom70/71 and is important for maintaining mitochondrial function during stress. Cells have multiple proteolytic pathways to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis, some of which target individual mitochondrial proteins, while others remove large portions of the organelle through mitophagy (selective autophagy). Mitochondrial dysfunction can contribute to many age-associated and metabolic disorders. In yeast, replicative aging is used as a model to study cellular aging and age-related mitochondrial dysfunction. A new mitophagy pathway has been discovered in aged yeast cells, which is autophagy-dependent but distinct from the previously characterized Atg32-dependent pathway. The study identified a decline in the autophagy-dependent degradation of mitochondrial proteins in very old yeast, which can lead to the production of Dnm1-dependent vesicles.
The RCK domain is responsible for regulating the gating of ligand-gated K+ channels in response to chemical stimuli. This domain is found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic channels and transporters. The GsuK channel from Geobacter sulfurreducens is a dual RCK-containing, multi-ligand gated K+ channel that has been studied for its structural and functional properties. This channel is activated by ADP and NAD+ but inhibited by Ca2+. The GsuK channel has a unique ion conduction pore and a distinct pore opening mechanism compared to other K+ channels. The RCK domains form a dimer and serve as the basic building block for the quaternary structural assembly in both K+ channels and transporters. The formation of the gating ring provides a platform for diverse allosteric ligand regulation among RCK-containing channels. The GsuK gating ring contains eight RCK domains and has a closed conformation due to the short four-helix bundle atop the center of the gating ring. The RCK2 domain of GsuK contains the conserved GxGxxG…D/E sequence motif for nucleotide binding. This channel is activated by ADP and NAD+ and inhibited by Ca2+. The 86Rb flux assay was used to identify the nucleotide ligands for GsuK, and it was found that ADP and NAD+ led to a significant increase in intraliposomal radioactivity.
Perceptual decisions are not only based on stimulus characteristics, probability, and rewards, but are also influenced by the physical resistance applied to the response. Motor response is not just a neutral output channel that reflects upstream decision, but can also recursively influence perceptual judgments. The cost to act can also influence decisions beyond the context of the specific action. It is suggested that motor cost and perceptual decisions are associated, and that bias arises in all three sequential stages of the decision-making process. The study showed that motor costs can influence decisions whether expressed with the manual or vocal response. Therefore, motor costs not only bias the report at the stage of motor response but also changes how sensory inputs are transformed into decisions, and bias the decision regardless of the response.
Researchers have identified a novel population of antigen-presenting CD207+CD326+ LC-like cells in the dermis that are long-lived, radio-resistant, and homed at a slow rate to the lymph nodes. These LC-like cells, unlike long-lived Langerhans cells (LCs) in the epidermis, are gradually replenished by bone marrow-derived precursors under steady state. LC-like cells are the main migratory CD207+CD326+ cell fractions present in the lymph nodes, not LCs, which are barely detectable. Cutaneous tolerance to haptens depends on LC-like cells, whereas LCs suppress effector CD8+ T-cell functions and inflammation locally in the skin during contact hypersensitivity. The findings could lead to the development of treatments for inflammatory skin disorders.
The study looks at the mechanism of eukaryotic mismatch repair (MMR), which corrects replication errors post-replicatively to prevent mutations in the next round of complementary DNA synthesis. The researchers used Xenopus egg extracts and discovered a mechanism for long-term retention of the MMR capability. They found that DNA-bound PCNA is the signal that enables strand discrimination after the disappearance of strand discontinuities and identified a novel role for MutSα in the retention of the post-replicative MMR capability. The study shows that nucleoplasmic extract of Xenopus eggs efficiently induces gap-directed, strand-specific MMR, which is dependent on MutSα/β and MutLα/β/γ complexes. This study sheds light on the importance of PCNA and MutSα in maintaining the temporal window for MMR.
The ability to hold information in memory over a short period of time, known as working memory, is a crucial aspect of cognition. While it is known that the prefrontal cortex is important for working memory, recent studies have suggested that sensory cortices also play a role. In this study, the authors investigated the role of the auditory cortex in auditory working memory in mice. Through electrophysiological recordings and optogenetic methods, they found that auditory cortex neurons were active not just during the presentation of a stimulus, but also during the early delay period, and that suppressing their activity during this time impaired working memory performance. The authors conclude that the auditory cortex is essential for encoding and maintaining auditory information in working memory, particularly during the early delay period.
Reproductive organs in embryos rely on epithelial fusion, and disruptions can cause significant human birth defects, such as ocular coloboma. In a study of optic fissure closure in embryonic chicks, evidence was found for roles of apoptosis and epithelial remodelling in the fusion process, and the Netrin-1 gene was shown to have an evolutionarily conserved and essential requirement for OFC, as well as a potential role in palate fusion. The study reveals Netrin-1 as a strong candidate gene for human coloboma and other multi-system developmental fusion defects.
The document discusses a study that examines the impact of aging on autophagy (a cellular process that helps clear out damaged proteins and organelles) in mammalian neurons. The authors found that the rate of autophagosome biogenesis (the formation of structures that help clear out damaged proteins and organelles) decreases in neurons with age, while there are pronounced morphological differences in autophagic vesicles in neurons from aged mice. Autophagy defects are implicated in multiple late-onset neurodegenerative diseases including Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and Parkinson’s diseases. The study suggests a novel therapeutic target for future studies in age-associated neurodegeneration.
The T cell receptor (TCR) engagement opens Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+ (CRAC) channels and triggers the formation of an immune synapse between T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Actin reorganizes into a concentric lamellipod and lamella with retrograde actin flow that helps regulate the intensity and duration of TCR signaling. Calcium influx is required to drive actin organization and dynamics at the synapse. Elevated intracellular Ca2+ in T cells has been associated with cytoskeleton-dependent processes. Indirect evidence suggests that intracellular Ca2+ may regulate actin organization and dynamics at the synapse. Ca2+ influx through CRAC channels acts at multiple levels to organize actin and promote retrograde flow, which in turn drives endoplasmic reticulum remodeling and the localization of STIM1 and Orai1 to the center of the synapse. Thus, Ca2+ self-organizes CRAC channels at the synapse while creating feedback loops that may help regulate T cell sensitivity to antigen.
Individual neurons in the brain can display somatic genomic mosaicism, leading to complex genomic mosaicism of unknown function. This study found altered genomic mosaicism in single, sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) neurons characterized by increases in DNA content and amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene copy number. AD cortical nuclei displayed large variability, with average DNA content increases of approximately 8% over non-diseased controls unrelated to trisomy 21. Two independent single-cell copy number analyses identified amplifications at the APP locus. These data identify somatic genomic changes in single neurons, affecting known and unknown loci, which are increased in sporadic AD and further indicate functionality for genomic mosaicism in the CNS.
The high frequency of the apolipoprotein-L1 (APOL1) kidney disease risk variants G1 and G2 in populations of African ancestry has been attributed to their possession of genes that offer innate resistance to various African trypanosomes. Attempts to understand the susceptibility of individuals to these various trypanosomes using kidney disease-risk variants G1 and G2 demonstrates that heterozygosity, and not the homozygous or wild-type haplotypes, protects against Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense while APOL1 G1 associates with the asymptomatic carriage of Trypanosoma brucei gambiense. This suggests that APOL1 kidney-disease variants are selected and maintained in human populations due to their capacity to protect against trypanosomiasis.
Researchers have found a way to convert human fibroblasts from donors ranging from newborn to near centenarians into neurons that retain age-associated signatures. By using a microRNA-based cellular reprogramming approach, the team ensured that the epigenetic clock that determines the methylation status of 353 specific CpG loci was conserved. Transcriptome and microRNA profiles of neurons converted from young and old fibroblasts revealed upregulated and downregulated genes with ageing in both sets of cells, indicating that these signatures can be preserved in converted neurons. The findings are important as age-related neurodegeneration may be due to cellular ageing processes that result in accumulation of damaged DNA and proteins in neurons. Converting fibroblasts into neurons also ensures that cells from elderly people can be studied in their individual DNAm age states.
The document discusses the mechanism behind nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) in green algae and investigates the role of the chlorophyll and carotenoid-binding protein LHCSR3 in NPQ. Through in vivo and in vitro experiments, two distinct quenching processes, regulated by pH and zeaxanthin, were identified within LHCSR3. These processes protect against reactive oxygen species formation under excess sunlight and provide different induction and recovery kinetics for photoprotection in a changing environment. Single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy was used to identify protein conformational states and the dynamics of the quenching processes. The study found that the two quenching processes function in parallel and either parameter can activate full quenching and prevent ROS accumulation. The pH-dependent quenching in LHCSR3 is controlled by the protonation of residues in the C-terminus, while the Zea-dependent quenching is activated even at neutral pH both in vitro and in vivo.
Researchers have identified a new protein, called redeye, that plays a role in regulating sleep in Drosophila (fruit flies). The protein is an alpha subunit of a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and is required for sleep. Levels of redeye increase in response to the homeostatic drive to sleep, which in turn promotes sleep. The discovery was made after researchers carried out a genetic screen of chemically-mutagenized flies to identify short-sleeping mutants.
The article discusses the role of Synaptotagmin 4 (Syt4) and Syntaxin 4 (Syx4) in regulating synaptic growth and plasticity in the postsynaptic cell at Drosophila neuromuscular junctions. The study used RNAi screening to identify regulators of postsynaptic exocytosis and found that Syx4 mediates retrograde signaling, modulating the membrane levels of Syt4 and Neuroligin 1 (Nlg1). Syx4-dependent trafficking was found to regulate synaptic development, including controlling synaptic bouton number and the ability to bud new varicosities in response to acute neuronal stimulation. The study suggests that a conserved postsynaptic SNARE machinery controls multiple aspects of retrograde signaling and cargo trafficking within the postsynaptic compartment. Overall, the findings provide important insight into the mechanisms underlying synaptic development and function.
Researchers conducted a study to investigate the capacity of lower vertebrates to experience itch by screening for itch-inducing compounds in zebrafish larvae. They found that the TLR7 agonist imiquimod was the only pruritogen that elicited a somatosensory neuron response and induced itch-like behaviors in zebrafish. The researchers found that the imiquimod-responsive TRPA1-expressing neurons were more sensitive to noxious stimuli than other TRPA1-expressing neurons, suggesting a model for selective itch via activation of a specialized subpopulation of somatosensory neurons. Furthermore, they found that only trpa1b, not tlr7, was necessary for mediating behavioral responses to IMQ in larval zebrafish. Moreover, the study found that TLR7 plays no role in the direct activation of somatosensory neurons and does not appear to potentiate the response of TRPA1 to IMQ. Finally, they discovered species differences in the function of TRPA1 that could provide a potential mechanism for the itch selectivity of IMQ in mice.
The article discusses the role of the CUB-LDL protein, Lost and found (Loaf), in regulating the formation of stable connections between neurons in the developing Drosophila visual system. Loaf is required in the UV-sensitive R7 photoreceptor for normal axon targeting when also present in its synaptic partners. Loaf is hypothesized to regulate the trafficking or function of cell surface proteins, and an excess of these proteins on the synaptic partners of R7 prevents the formation of stable connections. The study suggests that correct targeting depends on the relative levels of Loaf in R7 and another cell type. Loaf is expressed in many cells in the medulla neuropil and also in R7 axons and terminals.
The CaMKII protein is a candidate for long-term information storage in synaptic plasticity due to its ability to form a molecular bistable switch. Computational methods were used to analyze the effect of subunit exchange on the CaMKII pathway in different micro-environments. The results showed that subunit exchange enhances information retention by CaMKII by improving the stability of its switching in the post synaptic density and by slowing the decay of its activity in the spine cytosol. This has important implications for memory storage in networks. The CaMKII/PP1 bistable switch is an attractive candidate for memory storage in the synapse due to its ability to maintain its state despite stochastic chemical noise and protein turnover. The study showed that subunit exchange and diffusion introduce several interesting additional properties that affect bistability and stability.
Endometriosis is a painful and chronic disease affecting 1 in 10 women of childbearing age, with no adequate treatment available. Medical use of cannabis derivatives is a current hot topic and there is increasing availability of phytocannabinoids. Researchers evaluated the effects of repeated exposure to Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in a mouse model of surgically-induced endometriosis. Daily treatments with THC alleviated mechanical hypersensitivity and pain unpleasantness, modified uterine innervation and restored cognitive function without altering the anxiogenic phenotype. Strikingly, THC also inhibits the development of endometrial cysts. These findings suggest that scheduled clinical trials should investigate the possible use of THC for women with endometriosis.
The study explores how birds learn to sing by comparing their own song to a memory of a tutor's song rather than through explicit external rewards. The researchers found that the avian cortical region, the AIV, plays an important role in song evaluation and receives input from auditory cortical areas. Lesions to the AIV resulted in vocal learning deficits, and AIV neurons showed fast responses to disruptive auditory feedback during singing. The researchers suggest that the auditory cortical areas may guide learning by transmitting song evaluation signals to the dopaminergic midbrain and subcortical targets. The study provides insight into how motor behavior is learned through self-evaluation of motor performance, rather than relying on explicit external rewards.
Researchers have identified that Arabidopsis pollen aperture patterns are controlled by the ancient ELMOD protein family which are positive regulators of aperture domain specification. Two members of the ELMOD family, MACARON and ELMOD_A, act upstream of previously discovered aperture proteins, and their levels of expression influence the number of aperture domains that form on the developing pollen grain. The study sheds light on aperture patterning and characterizes members of the plant ELMOD protein family. Apertures are characteristic gaps in pollen walls which become protected from exine deposition and form brightly patterned features on a pollen grain's surface. The research helps to understand how diversity of aperture patterns in nature is achieved and opens up new avenues for investigating the process.
This document describes a study on tauopathy, a disease caused by the accumulation of amyloid protein in the brain. The researchers purified and characterized two forms of tau monomer, one inert and one seed-competent. They found that the seed-competent form can trigger intracellular tau aggregation, induce fibrilization in vitro, and self-assemble. The researchers used crosslinking with mass spectrometry to probe the structural differences between the two forms of tau monomer and found that the hexapeptide motifs responsible for amyloid formation were exposed in the seed-competent form but relatively inaccessible in the inert form. The study also explored the smallest unit of tau seeding and tested the hypothesis that a tau trimer is the minimal assembly size that triggers endocytosis and intracellular seeding. The study found that both the inert and seed-competent forms of tau monomer could seed intracellular aggregation with resultant fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The researchers concluded that the identification of distinct and stable forms of tau monomer, including some that are uniquely seed-competent, could help understand the initiation of protein aggregation in tauopathy and design more effective diagnostics and therapeutics.
L1 retrotransposons, which constitute 17% of the human genome, are the only retrotransposons that are able to autonomously drive human genomic plasticity. L1 sequences consist of the bidirectional promoter, two open reading frames (ORF), ORF1, and ORF2, separated by a short inter-ORF region, and a 3’ untranslated region with a weak polyadenylation signal. RNA polymerase II transcribes a 6kb bicistronic L1 mRNA encoding ORF1P (an RNA binding protein with chaperone activity) and ORF2P (which contains domains with endonuclease and reverse transcriptase activity). A necessary step for L1 proliferation is L1 proteins entering the nucleus. However, there is still a lack of clear understanding regarding L1’s lifecycle and the processes involved in restricting its insertion and intragenomic spread. Here, the modes of L1 proteins’ entrance into the nucleus are identified as a necessary step for L1 proliferation. The L1 lifecycle is intimately coordinated with the cell cycle. LINE-1 encoded proteins appear to enter the nucleus during mitosis, and retrotransposition appears to occur mainly during S phase.
Resident microbes in the gastrointestinal tract are important for the development of the pancreas but their influence on other digestive organs is less explored. The effect of bacteria on the development of the pancreatic β cell population during early larval development has been investigated using gnotobiotic zebrafish. The study found that the normal expansion of the pancreatic β cell population requires the intestinal microbiota and specific bacterial members with the gene BefA (β Cell Expansion Factor A) can restore normal β cell numbers. Homologs of BefA are also found in some human-associated bacterial species. The findings suggest a role for the microbiota in the early development of pancreatic β cells, which may be related to the association between low diversity childhood fecal microbiota and increased diabetes risk.
Researchers have identified ephrin-B2 as a critical driver of perivascular invasion in glioblastomas, the most common and aggressive type of primary brain tumour. Glioblastomas contain subpopulations of cells with stem cell properties, known as glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSC), which are responsible for infiltration and tumour recurrence following therapy. The study used a murine GBM model to compare vascular interactions of the resultant transformed GSC-like cells and immortalised parental cells. It found that ephrin-B2 expressed on vascular endothelial cells inhibits the migration of non-tumourigenic cells, resulting in cell confinement. In contrast, transformation to GSC-like cells overrides this tumour-suppressive mechanism to drive perivascular invasion. Ephrin-B2 was identified as an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of GBM.
The document discusses the need to study gene expression in a wider range of cell types and states to better understand the connection between gene regulation and complex phenotypes, including disease. The authors propose the use of embryoid bodies (EBs), organoids that contain a multitude of cell types in dynamic states, as a system to study dynamic regulatory processes. The study aimed to characterize gene expression in early developmental cell types and to evaluate the utility of EBs as a new model system for mapping dynamic inter-individual regulatory differences in a large variety of cell types. The results show that scRNA-seq of differentiating EBs has the potential to be a powerful model system for the study of inter-individual variation in gene regulation across an array of functionally and temporally diverse cell types. The study used a range of analytical tools to identify morphologically and developmentally distinct cell types and to annotate cells based on the expression of known marker genes and comparisons to reference datasets.
The coordination of flagella movements in certain organisms remains unclear. To explore their coordination, two micropipette-held somatic cells of Volvox carteri, with distinct intrinsic beating frequencies, were studied in high-speed experiments. Findings showed that flagella, coupled solely through a fluid, could achieve robust synchrony despite differences in their intrinsic properties. This was demonstrated by closely-separated pairs of cells that exhibited synchronicity for thousands of beats despite a discrepancy in their intrinsic frequencies. Furthermore, manipulation of the relative flagellar orientation revealed in-phase and antiphase states. The study also showed that flagellar tracking with precision could reveal waveform changes that resulted from hydrodynamic coupling.
Researchers have discovered that the RasGAP Neurofibromin (NF1) gene enables laboratory-cultured amoebae to feed on liquid media. Amoebae feed on bacteria through phagocytosis and macropinocytosis but have been developed in laboratory settings to feed and grow on liquid media. Using "forward genetics", researchers analysed mutants that could grow without using bacteria and found that the NF1 gene had a causal relationship with laboratory axenic growth. The gene controls the size of large vesicles that amoebae use to take up liquid nutrients through endocytosis. Study results suggest that the function of NF1 evolved in primitive organisms to enable them to constrain and shape their feeding structures.
The structure and mechanism of the citrate transporter SeCitS from the human pathogen Salmonella enterica have been studied. The transporter takes up citrate as a nutrient via the sodium symporter SeCitS, and the study found that there are three different conformations of the active protomer. The structures of the different conformations explain the transport mechanism in detail, indicating a six-step process where citrate and sodium are translocated across the membrane by a 31° rotation of a helix bundle. The transport process is driven by sodium but not potassium or lithium. The study also found that protons do not participate directly in the transport mechanism. The findings have implications for understanding similar transport mechanisms in a wide variety of related and unrelated secondary transporters, including important drug targets.
The MCM helicase is essential for DNA replication and loads at replication origins as an inactive double-hexamer encircling duplex DNA. The molecular details of MCM DNA interactions during the loading and activation process are under investigation. The Pyrococcus furiosus MCM N-terminal domain hexamer bound to ssDNA was studied, and a conserved MCM-ssDNA binding motif (MSSB) was defined. The MSSB is conserved in several Mcm2-7 subunits, and mutant combinations in S. cerevisiae Mcm2-7 are not viable. The findings suggest the MSSB interacts with leading strand DNA during helicase activation to select the strand for translocation, contributing to the selection of the leading strand DNA template during helicase activation.
Researchers have trained and tested epigenetic scores (EpiScores) for 953 plasma proteins to uncover epigenetic influences on disease predictions. Using data from four cohorts, the researchers identified 109 EpiScores that explained between 1% and 58% of the variance in protein levels after adjusting for known protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) genetic effects. By projecting these EpiScores into an independent sample and relating them to incident morbidities over a follow-up of 14 years, the researchers uncovered 137 EpiScore-disease associations. These EpiScores for protein levels can be a valuable resource for disease prediction and risk stratification.
This document discusses the use of biosensors to analyze the molecular and developmental factors influencing neurotransmitter release at specialized synaptic regions known as active zones. The study focused on Drosophila neuromuscular junctions, where motor neurons form glutamatergic synapses onto bodywall muscles, each containing many active zones that have unique release probabilities. The release probability was found to be highly variable across different neurons and between active zones formed by the same neuron. The study found that release probability was heterogeneous but represented a stable feature of each active zone. The release probability remained stable during high-frequency stimulation and retained heterogeneity in mutants lacking the Ca2+ sensor Synaptotagmin 1. The rate of synapse maturation was activity-dependent, as both increases and decreases in neuronal activity modulated glutamate receptor field size and segregation.
Each of the three major classes of parvalbumin (PV) expressing hippocampal interneurons further splits into functionally distinct sub-classes during fast network events in vivo, but not during slower oscillations. This doubling of the repertoire of spatio-temporal patterns of GABA release is key in the regulation of local circuit operations and rhythmogenesis in the brain. The PV interneurons are important for the coordination of the principal cell assemblies that enable the timing of neuronal discharges and the temporal binding of spatially distributed cell populations. Moreover, they have been linked to a number of neurological and psychiatric disorders including epilepsy, schizophrenia, and autism. The versatility and precision in the GABAergic coordination of principal cell excitability arise from the diversity of interneurons that enables the selective timing of GABAergic inputs to specific spatial domains of principal cells.
Autophagy, which is the process of bulk turnover of intracellular components in response to various types of stress, has been found to facilitate the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 1β (IL-1β). Researchers reconstituted an autophagy-regulated secretion of mature IL-1β (m-IL-1β) in non-macrophage cells and found that cytoplasmic IL-1β associates with the autophagosome and m-IL-1β enters into the lumen of a vesicle intermediate, revealing the mechanism accounting for its secretion as a soluble protein. The study sheds light on the mechanism of unconventional secretion of IL-1β and the role of autophagy in this process.
The article describes the role of the GpsB protein in cell division in the spherical bacterium Staphylococcus aureus. The protein is shown to interact with the core component of the division machinery, FtsZ, and is essential for stabilizing the Z-ring at the onset of cell division and remodeling the divisome during cytokinesis. Depletion of GpsB in vivo arrested cell division and led to cell lysis, and overproduction of GpsB inhibited cell division and led to the formation of enlarged cells. The article also discusses the different functions of GpsB orthologs in other bacterial species and reports that the overproduction of GpsBSa is toxic to both B. subtilis and S. aureus.
Researchers developed a new tool called tiv-AFM to study the spatio-temporal dynamics of tissue stiffness during development. They found that tissue stiffness changes significantly within tens of minutes and identified a close relationship between tissue mechanics and developmental processes. The study was conducted on Xenopus embryos and all animal experiments were approved by the Ethical Review Committee of the University of Cambridge. Statistical analyses were used to analyze the data.
Scientists have determined the crystal structure of human LAP1, a protein that interacts with Torsins, poorly understood endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized AAA+ ATPases, and is involved in the movement disorder caused by a single glutamate deletion in TorsinA. LAP1 targets TorsinA to the nuclear envelope by forming an alternating, heterohexameric (LAP1-Torsin) 3 ring, in which LAP1 acts as the Torsin activator. Although LAP1 was first considered as a Torsin substrate, it is now being proposed as a possible activator of Torsin. LAP1 possesses an atypical AAA+ fold lacking canonical nucleotide binding motifs but has a conserved arginine 563, which is positioned exactly where the arginine finger of canonical AAA+ ATPases is found. Rebellion, featuring articles on technology, science and culture, reported the key findings.
Transcription factors play a critical role in gene expression regulation, but their role after transcription initiation is not well understood. A recent study found that the homeoprotein Nkx2-5 and the exonuclease Xrn2 play a role in regulating alternative polyadenylation (APA) during mouse heart development. Nkx2-5 regulates the usage of poly(A) sites and is associated with both transcription start sites (TSSs) and downstream regions of genes. Moreover, Nkx2-5 controls APA in conjunction with Xrn2. These findings suggest a role for tissue-specific transcription factors in regulating APA. Transcription factors orchestrate the processes of heart development by positively and negatively regulating thousands of genes. Mutations in transcription factors cause congenital heart disease (CHD) by disrupting gene expression profiles that are tightly regulated by transcription factor networks. The study also reveals the importance of histone modifications during heart development.
Researchers have discovered that chromatin loops, the folding mechanism of mammalian genomes, are dynamic and frequently break and reform, contrary to the previous belief that they were stable. Topologically associating domains are formed by loops, which are in turn controlled by the insulator protein CTCF and cohesin. The researchers used live cell single-molecule imaging to show that CTCF and cohesin form a rapidly exchanging 'dynamic complex', contrary to the widely held belief that they were a typical stable complex. The researchers also discovered that CTCF binds chromatin in a more dynamic way than cohesin, with a residence time of about one to two minutes while cohesin's residence time is closer to 22 minutes. The researchers used CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing to tag Ctcf and Rad21 with HaloTag for live cell imaging without altering their endogenous expression levels.
Stem cells are critical to the maintenance of tissue and a decline in stem cell function is a hallmark of aging. Dedifferentiation has emerged as a mechanism underlying the replenishment of the stem cell pool. This study explores the functional importance of dedifferentiation in the Drosophila testis, where germline stem cells (GSCs) decrease during aging. The study shows that bam-lineage dedifferentiation does not impact the GSC pool under normal laboratory conditions, but becomes critical under stressful conditions, such as mating or starvation. Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling is activated during recovery from stress and is essential for dedifferentiation of bam-expressing spermatogonia. Inhibition of JNK activity markedly reduces the number of GSCs in mated males or challenging conditions, demonstrating that dedifferentiation provides a mechanism to maintain the germline and ensure fertility under chronically stressful conditions.
The role of liver X receptor alpha and beta (LXRα/β) in metabolic regulation is crucial but their mechanism underlying vagal sensing itself is less known. Recently, an enrichment of LXRα/β in the nodose ganglia of the vagus nerve was identified. These neurons play a crucial role in the regulation of satiation, but the mechanisms underlying vagal sensing are still unknown. In a recent study, mice lacking LXRα/β in peripheral sensory neurons were found to have increased energy expenditure and weight loss when fed a Western diet. Vagal afferent neurons innervate the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, liver, and portal vein, and link peripheral levels of gastrointestinal nutrients as well as circulating and stored fuels. This study shows that the ability to metabolize and sense cholesterol and/or fatty acids in peripheral neurons is an important requirement for physiological adaptations to Western diets.
Repeated exposure to infected mosquito bites during chemoprophylaxis and sporozoites (CPS) treatment with chloroquine can protect humans against malaria. A new mouse model was established to investigate the strain-specificity and stage of malaria immunity. Immunization with Plasmodium chabaudi by mosquito bite under chloroquine cover induces long-lived protection against blood-stage parasites, rather than pre-erythrocytic immunity. Exposure to blood-stage parasitemia has the potential to elicit robust, long-lived heterologous blood-stage immunity and cross-stage immunity targeting pre-erythrocytic stages. There is no licensed vaccine for human parasitic diseases like malaria so vaccines must mimic naturally acquired immune responses. Transmission must be blocked for malaria control and eventually eradication. A CPS immunization protocol using chemoprophylaxis and sporozoites (CPS) ensures exposure to pre-erythrocytic and blood-stage parasites, making it unique in its potential to induce total Plasmodium life cycle protection. Pre-erythrocytic immunity is only acquired after high-dose sporozoite immunization but blood-stage immunity can contribute to pre-erythrocytic efficacy of this immunization protocol. Liver parasite burden was analyzed after mosquito bite challenge to determine the stage-specificity of protection. Immunization by mosquito bite under chloroquine cover failed to elicit pre-erythrocytic immunity. Immunization with large numbers of sporozoites can induce pre-erythrocytic immunity that mosquitoes can transmit, and the threshold may be dependent on the virulence of the strain. Mouse models may aid vaccine development.
A study has developed a method for isolating arabinan-containing polysaccharides from pea fiber and measuring the biochemical activities of gut microbiota in vivo. The study used a model human gut bacterial strain consortium in gnotobiotic mice, producing 'Microbiota Functional Activity Biosensors' (MFABs) made of glycans covalently linked to the surface of fluorescent paramagnetic microscopic glass beads. These MFABs were used to directly quantify bacterial metabolism of structurally distinct arabinans in different human diet contexts. The study found that knowledge of the bioactive components of fibers, and the capacity to directly measure microbiota function with MFABs, could provide new approaches for designing 'next-generation' prebiotics and foods that are more accessible to and have a greater impact on, the gut microbiota.
The authors use a new system to track multiple mice in an environment to study group behavior and interactions. They show that models that only rely on individual traits and pairwise correlations between animals do not accurately capture group behavior. Models that include third-order interactions give a more accurate picture of the group's behavior. The authors use these models to infer social interaction maps for individual groups and show that environmental complexity during adolescence affects the collective group behavior of adult mice. The study provides new experimental and mathematical frameworks for studying group behavior and social interactions. The authors also use maximum entropy-based modeling to quantify the nature of correlated group behavior and map social interactions between individuals. They find that the group is much more complex than a collection of individuals or pairs, and that the combination of individual mouse traits and dependencies between mice shapes the group's behavior.
A new study by researchers at the University of California, San Francisco has found that differences in DNA methylation, which can indicate an increased risk of disease, between ethnic groups is only partially explained by shared genetic inheritance. Social, cultural and environmental factors are found to significantly contribute to variations in the methylation of almost 1,200 distinct locations in the genome. The study’s authors argue that their findings have important implications for the use of ancestry to predict biological changes, as well as for the utility of grouping individuals of Latino descent as a single ethnic group.

Researchers have discovered that coordination between the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the hippocampus plays an important role in spatial learning and memory formation. The VTA, which is responsible for the representation of reward prediction error, modulates its firing with hippocampal sharp wave-ripple (SPW-R) events during quiet wakefulness, and SPW-R events associated with hippocampal replay of spatial sequences. The coordination between VTA neurons and SPW-R events is significantly diminished during slow wave sleep. The results suggest distinct contributions of VTA reinforcement activity associated with hippocampal spatial replay to the processing of wake and slow wave sleep-associated spatial memory.
Researchers have identified five genes that may be targeted in combination with PI3K inhibitors to kill cancer cells, according to a study published in the journal eLife. Researchers used a shRNA-based apoptosis screen to identify the genes in a breast cancer cell that was positive for PIK3CA mutation. The identified genes, PIM2, ZAK, TACC1, ZFR and ZNF565, exhibited activity that provoked cancer cell death when they were suppressed in combination with PI3K inhibition. The authors said that the results provide a basis to develop combination therapies targeting PI3K. 

A study investigated the effects of a 24-hour gluing manipulation on the somatotopic representations of human somatosensory cortex using fMRI and behavioural psychophysics. The study hypothesised that there would be increased co-activation across the glued digit pair and an increase in their shared cortical representation, but another hypothesis suggested that compensatory behaviour during the 24-hour gluing manipulation would promote changes in the cortical representations of adjacent, but unaffected digits. The study found that the representation of the ring finger shifted towards the little finger and away from the middle finger following the gluing manipulation, and the same changes were evident in behavioural tasks, showing reduced sensitivity for discriminating the temporal order of stimuli to the ring and little fingers, and increased substitution errors across this pair on a speeded reaction time task.
Researchers have developed a live-cell imaging tool to study the interplay between cell proliferation and quiescence in a wide range of developmental contexts. The tool enables the visualization of G1/G0 dynamics during metazoan development, and distinguishes between cycling cells in G1 and quiescent cells in G0 using a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) sensor. The CDK sensor is a fluorescently tagged CDK substrate that translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in response to CDK activity and sensor phosphorylation. The researchers demonstrate that the CDK sensor can distinguish between cycling and quiescent cells in several embryonic and post-embryonic somatic lineages in Caenorhabditis elegans and zebrafish, and can predict future cell behavior based on CDK activity. The CDK sensor can shed new light on the proliferation-quiescence decision in living organisms, and may aid the study of cell-cycle control in various developmental contexts.
This study examines the role of odorant binding proteins (Obps) in olfactory coding. Obps are believed to transport hydrophobic odorants to odorant receptors, but their function is not well understood. The study constructs a map of the Drosophila antenna, identifying the sensilla types that different Obps are mapped to. This lays a foundation for studying Obp function, and the results suggest that some sensilla do not require an abundant Obp for odorant transport. The study also suggests a novel role for an Obp in buffering changes in the odor environment, providing a molecular form of gain control. Overall, this work provides a foundation for incisive studies of Obp function and encourages a broader view of the functions performed by the large and diverse family of Obps.
This document discusses the process of bacterial chemotaxis, which is the way environmental signals affect a cell's behavior. While the process has been heavily studied, how the rotational states of a cell's flagella determine whether the cell moves or changes direction remains poorly understood. This study measures the swimming behavior of individual E. coli cells while simultaneously detecting the rotational states of each flagellum to better understand the connection between flagella and cell behavior. The results show a simple mathematical expression that relates a cell's run/tumble bias to the number and average rotational state of its flagella. However, due to inter-flagellar correlations, an "effective number" of flagella - smaller than the actual number - enters into this relation. The paper also discusses the mechanism for inter-flagellar coupling and how fluctuations in the regulator CheY-P are the source of the correlations. Finally, the study shows that the behavior of multi-flagellated cells can still be mapped to a simple veto model by renormalizing the flagellar number to a lower "effective number" of independent flagella.
The Fam60a gene plays a critical role in embryonic development in mice by regulating gene expression and DNA methylation at specific gene promoters. The gene interacts with components of the Sin3a-Hdac transcriptional corepressor complex and is required for proper organogenesis and cell proliferation. Fam60a is also involved in regulating gene expression in both positive and negative manners, with up to 245 genes having at least one Fam60a binding peak in the TSS region. The loss of Fam60a results in embryonic death and a range of abnormalities such as hypoplasia of visceral organs, neural tube defects, and transposition of the great arteries. Fam60a is also expressed in a subset of cells including somatic stem cells in the intestine.
Newborn cells in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the adult hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG), a neurogenic niche in the adult mammalian brain, die during early differentiation from intermediate progenitors (IPCs) to immature neurons. Hypoxic niches were observed along the SGZ, composed of adult neural stem cells (NSCs) and early IPCs, while oxidative byproducts were present in adjacent late IPCs and neuroblasts. Stabilizing hypoxia-inducible factor-1α increased early survival but not proliferation or differentiation in newly born SGZ cells in vivo. The authors suggest that localized hypoxia contributes to the neurogenic microenvironment and determines the early, activity-independent survival of adult hippocampal newborn cells.
The SUV39 histone methyltransferases help regulate constitutive heterochromatin, repressing transcription from repetitive DNA sequences and ensuring genomic stability. However, it is unclear how these enzymes are localized to specific genomic loci. A study has found that chromatin-associated RNA plays a role in the stable association of SUV39H1 with constitutive heterochromatin. RNA associated with mitotic chromosomes is concentrated at pericentric heterochromatin, and is encoded by repetitive alpha-satellite sequences. Purified SUV39H1 directly binds nucleic acids through its chromodomain and associates with alpha-satellite RNA transcripts in cells. Mutations that disrupt the nucleic acid binding function of SUV39H1 cause defects in localization to pericentric heterochromatin, destabilize its association with chromatin, and result in heterochromatin silencing defects. These findings reveal a previously unrealized function for chromatin-associated RNA in regulating constitutive heterochromatin in human cells.
The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in adults, but the relationship is unclear. In this study, mice infected with a murine analog of EBV developed more severe collagen-induced arthritis, modeling EBV's role in RA. The study found that latent gammaherpesvirus infection enhances clinical arthritis, and disease enhancement requires viral latency and is not due to active virus stimulation of the immune response. The study also found that age-associated B cells (ABCs) are required for viral enhancement of disease, thereby establishing that ABCs are impacted by latent gammaherpesvirus infection and provoke arthritis. The study brings some clarification to the relationship between EBV and RA, which is not fully understood.
Researchers have visualized the immunoreactions generated in the tumour microenvironment in melanoma using a combination of adoptive cell therapy (ACT) and cyclophosphamide (CTX), and established an optimal strategy to improve the effectiveness of these approaches. They found that CTX-ACT combination treatment eliminated regulatory T cells (Tregs) and activated endogenous tumour-infiltrating immunocytes, increasing the accumulation of adoptive cytotoxic T lymphocytes and the infiltration of dendritic cells, and showing synergistic anti-tumour immune-enhanced effects. They suggest that such insights will help to optimize immunotherapy and to elucidate the mechanisms of immunocytes in cancer immunotherapy.
The article discusses the role of the zinc-finger protein ZitP in the polar organization and differentiation of the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus. ZitP is involved in pilus biogenesis and swarming motility, and is regulated by components of the cell cycle circuitry. ZitP and its effector protein CpaM are localized at both cell poles and each polar cluster has a distinctive architecture and a specialized function. Mutations in ZitP prevent infection of the bacteriophage φCbK by inhibiting pilus assembly. The article also examines the regulation of pilus and flagellum biogenesis, and discusses the specific promoters controlled by master cell cycle regulator CtrA and other GcrA target promoters. The article concludes by exploring the potential for ZitP to act as a novel multifunctional polarity regulator in other bacterial lineages.
This article discusses the use of super-resolution techniques to study the nanoscale organization of the neuronal microtubule network in rat hippocampal neurons. The study found that acetylated microtubules are enriched in the core of the dendritic shaft, while tyrosinated microtubules are enriched near the plasma membrane, forming a shell around the acetylated microtubules. Additionally, the study quantified the absolute number of acetylated and tyrosinated microtubules within dendrites and found that they account for 65-75% and ~20-30% of all microtubules, respectively, leaving only a few microtubules that do not fall in either category. These insights help to understand the spatial regulation of intracellular transport within neurons.
The question of whether nucleosomal or naked DNA is the preferred substrate for plant and animal methyltransferases remains unresolved. Researchers showed that genetic inactivation of a single DDM1/Lsh family nucleosome remodeler biases methylation towards inter-nucleosomal linker DNA in Arabidopsis thaliana and mouse, suggesting that nucleosome-free DNA is the preferred substrate of eukaryotic methyltransferases in vivo. Nucleosomes are strong barriers to DNA methyltransferases and linker-specific methylation can evolve simply by breaking the connection between nucleosome remodeling and DNA methylation. DNA methylation represses transposable element transcription and transposition in plants and vertebrates, is confined to linker DNA in several diverse species of marine algae, and provides a mechanism to heritably alter the genome without permanent modification of the DNA sequence. The observed CG and non-CG methylation patterns strongly argue that in the absence of nucleosome remodeling by DDM1, DNA within heterochromatic nucleosomes is unavailable to methyltransferases. Plant and animal genomes depend on the DDM1/Lsh family of Snf2-class nucleosome remodelers – proteins that can alter nucleosomes in various ways – to achieve normal levels of DNA methylation.
The study aims to understand the intricate structural and functional regulation of ISWI, a family of nucleosome remodeling enzymes that can alter the position or structure of nucleosomes. The histone H4 N-terminal tail is needed to mobilize nucleosomes, and the study mapped the H4-tail binding pocket of ISWI. The binding site was adjacent but not overlapping with the docking site of an auto-regulatory motif, AutoN, indicating that AutoN does not act as a simple pseudosubstrate as suggested previously. The N-terminal region (NTR) of ISWI contained additional motifs, termed acidicN and ppHSA, whose functions remained unknown. The study systematically interrogated the functions of all conserved motifs within the NTR by mutagenesis and a series of quantitative biochemical assays in vitro and in vivo. The study found that the NTR was functionally required in vivo and provided structural stability by clamping the NTR to Lobe 2 of the ATPase domain. The study showed that ppHSA and AT-hook were largely dispensable for ATP hydrolysis.
The glymphatics system is a CSF-mediated pathway that helps remove harmful molecules from the brain and may provide new therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's. However, there are no non-invasive methods for assessing glymphatic function in humans. This study presents a non-invasive MRI technique for assessing perivascular fluid movement, a critical component of the glymphatic pathway, in the rat brain. The technique may be a valuable biomarker for assessing CSF-mediated brain clearance and potentially identifying patients at risk for neurodegenerative conditions. This study also highlights the fluid-filled perivascular space as a promising target for non-invasive imaging biomarkers. The MRI technique uses diffusion weighted and ultra-long echo time sequences to detect fluid movement and demonstrates sensitivity to the directional dependence of fluid movement within the perivascular space. The study also investigates the dependence of the technique on cerebral vascular pulsation and modulation by dobutamine.
The article discusses how the protein PP1 can be targeted to specific substrates or locations by cofactors, but it is unclear how this confers sequence-specificity on PP1. The study focuses on the Phactr1 protein, a neuronally enriched PP1 cofactor that is controlled by G-actin. The researchers identified Phactr1/PP1 substrates using phosphoproteomics and determined the structures of Phactr1/PP1 bound to dephosphorylated forms of its substrates. They found that efficient catalysis requires interactions between hydrophobic residues in the substrate and a novel Phactr1-PP1 composite surface, which is required for efficient dephosphorylation. This specific sequence explains why Phactr1/PP1 exhibits enhanced reactivity towards its substrates, compared to other PP1 holoenzymes. The study shows that Phactr1 binding transforms the surface of PP1 adjacent to its catalytic site and suggests that the Phactr1 C-terminal sequences are sufficient to allow recognition of
This document discusses how flagella growth affects human health, and it describes the structure of flagella in different organisms. The article also emphasizes that the assembly process of flagella and cilia needs to be studied further in order to gain an understanding of how defects contribute to disease. The document includes electron tomography pictures and 3D models of the microtubule structures of flagella in different cell cycle stages and organisms. The study shows that there are multiple ways in which flagella grow and that this is species-specific. Defects in flagella growth can cause severe human diseases, including blindness, infertility, and even cancer.
The document discusses how animals rebuild lost or damaged tissues through developmental reprogramming. The authors use the flies' imaginal discs as a system to study this process, as it has compartments that come from different genetic programs, making it ideal for studying reprogramming during regeneration. They found that in the event of massive damage to the wing disc's posterior or dorsal compartments, the compartment boundaries break down and are soon reconstructed, which leads to some cells in the reconstruction process modifying their original identity. They concluded that the identity changes are due to the upregulation of the JNK pathway and the weakening of the epigenetic control mechanism. The document also discusses the compartments of the Drosophila imaginal disc and how the establishment and maintenance of these compartments' boundaries are important in the development of the wing disc.
Drosophila syncytial nuclear divisions limit early zygotic gene transcription unit size. Splicing avoidance is a possible explanation why most early zygotic genes are intronless. Researchers isolated two mutant alleles for a subunit of the NTC/Prp19 complexes which specifically impaired pre-mRNA splicing of early zygotic but not maternally encoded transcripts. Ectopic maternal expression of an early zygotic pre-mRNA was sufficient to suppress splicing defects in the mutant background. The findings demonstrate the existence of a developmental pre-requisite for highly efficient splicing during Drosophila early embryonic development and suggest the need for coordination between the cell cycle and gene architecture to ensure correct gene expression and avoid abnormally processed transcripts. A requirement for overall splicing efficiency is likely to vary during development. Fandango encodes the Drosophila ortholog of yeast SYF1 and human XAB2, both subunits of the NTC/Prp19 complexes. Fandango is required for splicing of kugelkern (kuk) transcripts. Splicing of early zygotic but not maternally encoded pre-mRNAs is affected in fandango mutants.
A study has found that cancer cells characterized by a CD44+/CD24- cell surface marker profile are genetically unstable and have intrinsic defects in their DNA-repair capabilities due to constitutive activation of the TGF-beta axis. This results in increased accumulation of DNA copy number alterations, genetic diversity, and adaptability to drug treatment. The study also suggests that the tumor microenvironment and gene regulatory networks could generate phenotypic diversity, enabling the development of novel, heritable genotypic profiles that could be selected for. The study used a genome-wide shRNA screen to identify genes involved in DNA damage repair that are required for the survival of CD44+/CD24- cells.
Researchers have reconstructed the neuronal connectome of a four-eye visual circuit in the larva of an annelid worm using serial-section transmission electron microscopy. The goal was to better understand how visual inputs drive motor output during animal behavior. The study found 71 neurons which were divided into photoreceptors that connect via three layers of interneurons to motor neurons that innervate the trunk muscles. The researchers discovered that the circuit compares light on either side of the body and stimulates body bending upon left-right light imbalance during visual phototaxis. This study provides a circuit-level and mechanistic explanation of how the eyes mediate spatial vision, whereby light intensities at the left and right eyes are compared to mediate tail bending during phototactic turns.
This article discusses the discovery of the mechanism controlling the size of myofibrils, which are the contractile units within muscle cells. The researchers found that a protein called Zasp mediates myofibril growth through protein oligomerization, and balance between two isoforms of Zasp – growing and blocking isoforms - sets the stereotyped diameter of myofibrils. The article discusses the importance of correct protein assembly and the role of Z-discs, which are the focal points for myofibril assembly. The study also discusses the formation of large aggregates composed mainly of Z-disc proteins, which is a hallmark of genetically caused myopathies. The researchers found that an imbalance of growing and blocking Zasp isoforms results in aggregate formation, enlarged Z-disc size or reduced Z-disc size. The article concludes that the findings have wide implications for diseases caused by aggregate formation, and sheds light on the evolutionary process behind muscle striation and the evolution of the ZM domain.
Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of histones play a key role in biological processes such as gene transcription, DNA replication, and chromosome segregation. A newly discovered PTM called lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is enriched at active gene promoters and potential enhancers in mammalian cell genomes. However, until now the enzymes that regulate the addition and removal of Kcr were unknown. Recent research has identified human Sirt1, Sirt2, and Sirt3 as enzymes that can catalyze the hydrolysis of lysine crotonylated histone peptides and proteins, and Sirt3 appears to function as a "decrotonylase" to regulate histone Kcr dynamics and gene transcription in living cells. This discovery helps to unravel unknown cellular mechanisms controlled by Sirt3, which have been previously considered solely as a deacetylase.
Researchers at the University of Oxford have discovered that the heart’s first contractions occur prior to the creation of the heart tube, contradicting previous ideas that contractions were a result of the tube's creation. The study looked using high-resolution live imaging of mouse embryos, observing random contractions and monitoring their development. Initially the embryonic hearts were 'spontaneous asynchronous Ca2+-oscillations' (SACOs). After nascent contractions began in stages the heart developed, with sacromeric assembly and Ca2+ transients, helped along by the sequential expression of the Na+-Ca2+ exchanger and L-type Ca2+ channel.
The extracellular N-terminal domain (NTD) of AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) plays a critical role in the positioning and clustering of these receptors at postsynaptic sites, which is important for synaptic transmission and plasticity. This highly sequence-diverse domain mediates synaptic anchoring in a subunit-selective manner, with receptors lacking the NTD exhibiting increased mobility in synapses and being unable to sustain long-term potentiation (LTP). The NTD is therefore necessary for faithful signal transmission in the brain.
Research has uncovered how reef-building corals transfer sterols from symbiotic dinoflagellates that enable the corals to survive in nutrient-poor waters. Sterols are important building blocks for cells and essential for cell membrane and endomembrane systems. Although sterols are normally acquired through a diet, symbiotic cnidarians must extract them from their symbiotic relationship as they are sterol auxotrophs. Scientists used gas chromatography/mass spectrometry to profile relative sterol abundances in different symbiont strains with different sterol compositions, and various hosts. They observed two major patterns of sterol transfer in the symbiont-host combinations, suggesting that selective sterol transfer and/or accumulation by the host may occur. Finally, the study looks at non-canonical variants of the conserved Niemann-Pick Type C2 (NPC2) sterol transporter that is among the most up-regulated genes in symbiotic cnidarians, with various homologues confined to cnidarians within the anthozoan class.
Inhibitory feedback is a common feature of developmental pathways, but it has been difficult to test its role in development. The mesendoderm inducer Nodal is known to activate its inhibitor Lefty, and this study examined the importance of the Nodal/Lefty system in development. The study found that inhibitory feedback is functional but fragile, and that patterning can occur without it, although with increased fragility. The spatial coupling of lefty expression to Nodal signaling is not required for normal development, and inhibition of Nodal signaling can be achieved with a small molecule drug.
Scientists have used inbred rat models to identify a potential new target for tackling chronic kidney disease. Researchers analysed the genomic architecture of rats with albuminuria, a condition marked by protein in the urine that suggests kidney damage, which also have elevated blood pressure. They honed in on transmembrane protein Tmem63c, which was shown to be differentially expressed in glomeruli during the onset of albuminuria. Loss of the same protein in the podocytes of patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis also provided strong evidence for its role as a novel target.
Adult-born granule cells (ABGCs) are involved in hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. It has been proposed that ABGCs contribute to pattern separation functions of the dentate gyrus, with young but functionally integrated ABGCs (around 4 weeks old) specifically contributing due to their heightened excitability. The authors of the research have investigated the cellular and integrative characteristics of ABGCs and have shown that they consist of two functionally distinguishable populations, adding a novel level of complexity to understanding how neurogenesis contributes to adult brain function. The ABGCs provided two temporally overlapping but functionally distinct neuronal cell populations, with one group being highly sensitive to narrow input intensity ranges while the other group linearly reports input strength. The two groups were largely independent of the cellular age and maturation stage.
Researchers have identified a previously unknown mechanism by which endothelial cells recruit white blood cells during inflammation, according to a study published in eLife. In animal models, endothelial-dependent recruitment of myeloid cell neutrophils was found to occur via the activation of CD95 receptors, which "mediates leukocyte slow rolling, adhesion and transmigration upon binding of CD95-ligand (CD95L) that is presented by endothelial cells." Furthermore, deletion of CD95 in neutrophils led to impaired bacterial clearance in a mouse model of sepsis. The authors suggest that therapeutic inhibition of CD95's activity could be used to counteract risk in inflammatory
Complexin is a synaptic vesicle fusion regulator in the presynaptic protein complex, but its mechanisms and regulatory effects are not well understood. The highly conserved central helix (CH) of complexin binds directly to the ternary SNARE complex and is essential for all known functions of complexin. The accessory helix (AH) is next to the CH in the protein and is reputedly important for CPX function. Studies by the team examined the impact of AH mutations and chimeras on CPX function in vivo and in vitro using C. elegans. The result suggests the AH operates by stabilizing CH secondary structure rather than through protein or lipid interactions. The research lead to an understanding that the principal role of the AH domain is to nucleate and propagate helical structure into the CH domain, and this function is conserved across evolution.
The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) is crucial for transporting immunoglobulins (IgA and IgM) across epithelia to mucosal secretions, where it becomes secretory antibodies or binds and blocks bacteria. Researchers have found the crystal structure of unliganded human secretory component (hSC) and compared it to the structure of teleost fish SC (tSC), an early pIgR ancestor. The hSC comprises five immunoglobulin-like domains (D1-D5) arranged as a triangle, with an interface between ligand-binding domains D1 and D5. These results provide detailed models for SC structure, address pIgR evolution, and demonstrate that SC uses multiple conformations to protect mammals from pathogens.
The article discusses how metabolism is changed during neural differentiation and how this affects neuronal survival. It was found that a switch from aerobic glycolysis in neural progenitor cells to neuronal oxidative phosphorylation is essential for neuronal survival. PGC-1α and ERRγ are metabolic regulators that increase upon neuronal differentiation to sustain the transcription of metabolic and mitochondrial genes. Mitochondrial mass proportionally increases with neuronal mass growth, indicating an unknown mechanism linking neuronal mitochondrial biogenesis to cell size. The balance between glycolysis and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation is essential for stem cell function. Neurons rely on oxidative phosphorylation to meet energy demands and malfunction of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation leads to a wide range of neurological disorders. The article also discusses how neuronal metabolism, defined by the metabolic enzymes in pathways such as glycolysis, TCA cycle and mitochondrial OXPHOS, is set up during development, maintained during adult life and altered in neurological disorders.
In larval zebrafish, the neural activity of the ventromedial caudal hypothalamus (cH) becomes increasingly active during food deprivation, while activity in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) is reduced. Exposure to food sensory and consummatory cues reverses the activity patterns of these two nuclei, consistent with their representation of opposing internal hunger states. The antagonistic relationship and functional importance of cH and LH activity patterns were confirmed by targeted stimulation and ablation of cH neurons. This suggests that these hypothalamic nuclei regulate different phases of hunger and satiety and coordinate energy balance via antagonistic control of distinct behavioral outputs.
A study conducted by the Stanford University School of Medicine has found that dopamine neurons in the midbrain release GABA along with dopamine to inhibit striatal projection neurons. GABA is a neurotransmitter that activates GABAA receptors, preventing other neurotransmitters from freely moving throughout the brain. Previous experiments had found that dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) inhibited the activity of striatal projection neurons using a co-released transmitter, but until now it was unknown what the identity of the co-released transmitter was. This study concluded that it was GABA using VMAT2 for vesicular loading.
Researchers have sequenced and assembled the genome of the colonial tunicate Botryllus schlosseri, a marine invertebrate that is one of the closest living relatives of vertebrates. The genome assembly comprises around 14,000 intron-containing predicted genes and 13,500 intron-less predicted genes. Some 40% of these could be placed into 13 chromosomes. By comparing the genome to other diverse taxonomic groups, the researchers gained insights into the evolution of vertebrates and lymphoid-mediated immunity. Botryllus schlosseri is regarded as a community resource for studying alternative modes of reproduction, natural transplantation reactions and stem cell-mediated regeneration.
The article discusses the role of laminin proteins in the signaling pathways necessary for morphogenesis and tissue-specificity in mammalian tissues, focusing specifically on their role in breast epithelial architecture. By studying non-malignant and malignant mammary epithelial cells and organoids in three-dimensional gels, the researchers identified a reciprocal regulatory network involving laminin proteins, nitric oxide, p53, HOXD10, microRNAs, EIF5A2, SCA1, and MMP-9 that connect the extracellular matrix and nuclear transcription factors to execute breast morphogenetic programs. They identified three microRNAs - miR-34c-5p, −30e, and −144 - that are significantly downmodulated in many breast tumors and tumor cell lines, and found that introducing each of these miRNAs into breast cancer cells led to severe growth impairment and phenotypic reversion- a novel movement termed 'coherent angular motion'. Finally, they discovered that p53 activity in normal tissues is high and inhibits NFκB (a negative player), revealing a role for p53 in maintaining differentiated states in 3D cultures and preventing malignant conversion.
Scientists have used X-ray crystallography to better understand how proteins change shape in the process of carrying out their function. The researchers used synchrotron crystallography and fixed-target X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) crystallography to create radiation-damage-free images of proteins in action. The findings suggest that there is a complex evolution of conformational heterogeneity in this enzyme between 180-240 K, with changes resulting from both thermal deactivation and solvent-driven protein motions in the crystal. The researchers argue that their data provides evidence for a conformation shuffling model, where exchange between rotamer states of a large aromatic ring in the middle of the network shifts the conformational ensemble for the other residues in the network.
The document discusses sexually transmitted papillomaviruses (HPVs) and the limitations in studying their transmission in laboratory animals. The discovery of the murine papillomavirus MmuPV1 offers a new model for studying sexually transmitted papillomaviruses in laboratory mice. The study provides evidence that MmuPV1 is sexually transmitted in unmanipulated, immunocompetent male and female mice. Female mice infected with MmuPV1 were housed with uninfected male mice, then the males were transferred to cages holding uninfected female mice. One-third of the female recipient mice acquired cervicovaginal infections. The study offers a new model for studying sexual transmission of papillomaviruses in laboratory mice.
The study aims to understand how genetically-identified motor neurons control the flexion of the fruit fly tibia. The study found that leg motor neurons exhibit a coordinated gradient of anatomical, physiological, and functional properties. Large, fast motor neurons control high force, ballistic movements while small, slow motor neurons control low force, postural movements. Intermediate neurons fall between these two extremes. The recordings in behaving flies confirmed that motor neurons are typically recruited in order from slow to fast. However, the study also found that fast, intermediate, and slow motor neurons receive distinct proprioceptive feedback signals, suggesting that the size principle is not the only mechanism that dictates motor neuron recruitment. The study establishes Drosophila as a tractable system for investigating neural mechanisms of limb motor control.
T follicular helper cells (Tfh) are essential for germinal center reactions and the production of high affinity, isotype-switched antibody responses. This study found that direct TGF-β signaling is important for the formation of influenza-specific Tfh cells, GC reactions, and isotype-switched, flu-specific antibody responses during acute viral infection. TGF-β suppresses IL-2 signaling and mTOR activation in Tfh precursor CD4 T cells early during infection, promoting Tfh differentiation. Additionally, the study identified a new role for TGF-β in balancing the development of Th1 and Tfh cells during acute viral infection. TFR cells were not found to form during acute LCMV infection, despite similarities in gene expression profiles with Treg cells. The study shows that direct TGF-β promotes the differentiation of Tfh precursor cells during viral infection.
A self-organizing model based on ring-rate adaptation shows that the approach to asymptotic states resembling face centered cubic (FCC) and hexagonal close packed (HCP) crystal structures in exploring a 3D environment involves several sub-processes over distinct time scales. While place cell and head direction cells have been shown to directly generalize to three dimensions, the form that grid cells will exhibit in higher dimensionality is still unclear. The paper describes a model of grid cell formation that accounts for both these aspects of spatial cognition, in a unitary perspective on the mEC network. The three-dimensional grid develops using the same principles of self-organization as in a two-dimensional grid. The presence of an additional dimension does not affect the process of initially bringing fields by adaptation to homogeneously and regularly cover the entire space.
Brian 2 is a simulator used for spiking neural network models. It offers a solution to the performance-flexibility trade-off using runtime code generation. Scientists write code with simple and concise high-level descriptions, and Brian transforms them into efficient low-level code that can run interleaved with their code. The simulator specifies the complete computational experiment, including equations, protocols, data analysis, etc. Brian requires model definitions to be explicit and supports arbitrary user-specified equations. It is available for Windows, OS X and Linux, and releases are under the free and open CeCILL 2 license.
The article describes a new approach to studying multi-protein complexes using sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation equipped with fluorescence detection (FDS-SV) with single excitation wavelength from single-component to multi-component detection using photoswitchable fluorescent proteins (psFPs). The technique allows for the characterization of protein complexes free in solution with high size resolution, at concentrations in the nanomolar and picomolar range. The psFPs make up a class of fluorescent proteins that can be switched between fluorescent and non-fluorescent states using different wavelengths of illumination. The article demonstrates proof of principle and investigates the high-affinity interactions of glutamate receptor GluA2 and GluA3 amino terminal domains, which engage in competitive homo-dimerization and hetero-dimerization processes that control the combination of receptor subtypes into diverse homomeric and heteromeric ion channel tetramers with different gating properties. The new approach has multiple advantages for studying multi-protein complexes, including increased sensitivity, lower concentrations, and higher-affinity systems than previously possible.
The protein UHRF1 plays a role in the inheritance of DNA methylation through its ability to bind to newly replicated DNA sites and recruit DNMT1 (a protein that maintains DNA methylation) through the ubiquitylation of histone H3. UHRF1 binds selectivity to hemi-methylated CpGs (HeDNA), but the role of HeDNA sensing in UHRF1 function is not fully understood. The study outlined here reveals that HeDNA interaction with UHRF1 is required for DNA methylation, and an orchestrated epigenetic control mechanism is created involving modifications to histones and DNA. The study concludes that UHRF1 chromatin targeting, H3 ubiquitylation, and DNA methylation inheritance rely on this complementary function of UHRF1's histone- and DNA-binding domains. Reciprocal positive cooperativity regulates the DNA- and histone-binding domains, and HeDNA recognition mainly regulates DNA methylation maintenance.
Scientists have identified a novel mechanism which licenses transcription in human mesenchymal stem cells, making them amenable to adipogenic conversion. Before adipogenesis, confluency promotes heterodimer recruitment of the bZip transcription factors C/EBPβ and ATF4 to a non-canonical C/EBP DNA sequence. ATF4 depletion decreases both cell-density-dependent transcription and adipocyte differentiation. The observations demonstrate that C/EBPβ bridges the transcriptional programs in naïve, confluent cells and early differentiating pre-adipocytes. The findings reveal a program of C/EBPβ-ATF4-dependent gene expression triggered by high-seeding density plays an important role in priming hMSCs for adipogenesis.

Anchoring proteins called AKAPs are responsible for sequestering kinases with their substrates to ensure intracellular signals are locally disseminated rather than indiscriminately transmitted throughout the cell. A team of scientists has been working to understand the mechanistic process behind this, as current knowledge about these macromolecular complexes is limited. By studying the PKA holoenzyme, a tetramer composed of two regulatory subunits (R) and two autoinhibited catalytic subunits (PKAc), they discovered a remarkable level of conformational plasticity that resides within the AKAP-PKA complex. They found that intrinsically disordered regions – a widespread phenomenon in nature – play an essential role in fine-tuning local protein phosphorylation events. They also discovered that the catalytic subunit remains within type-II PKA-AKAP18γ complexes upon cAMP elevation, generating a solid-state signalling microenvironment for substrate phosphorylation.
The NR5A nuclear receptors play a critical role in female fertility across species. In rodents, the NR5A1 and NR5A2 receptors are expressed in follicle cells and loss of either leads to severely impaired fertility. The functions of NR5A receptors in Drosophila ovaries have been largely unknown, but a recent study found that Ftz-f1, one of the NR5A nuclear receptors, is induced in follicle cells via ecdysteroid signaling and is required for follicle cell differentiation and maturation. This process is necessary for follicle rupture and ovulation. Ftz-f1 functions via the bHLH/PAS transcription factor Single-minded (Sim) to promote follicle cell differentiation/maturation, and its role can be replaced by the mouse homolog steroidogenic factor 1 (mSF-1), suggesting a conserved role for NR5A nuclear receptors in regulating folliculogenesis and ovulation across species.
The study investigates the role of the IL-6 receptor α chain (IL-6Rα) in innate immune recognition, specifically in T cell responses. The research shows that IL-6 signaling in effector T cells is necessary to overcome Treg-mediated suppression and is required for Th1 and Th17 T cell responses in vivo, as well as Tfh function, and the generation of functional memory CD4+ T cells. Depletion of Tregs rescues the Th1 response in IL-6Rα-deficient T cells, but not the Th17 response. The findings suggest that IL-6 cooperates with IL-1β to block the suppressive effect of Tregs on CD4+ T cells, at least in part by controlling their responsiveness to IL-2. The study indicates that IL-6 signaling is important for the induction of CD4+ T cell responses following TLR activation.
Researchers have identified the HNF1A transcription factor as a key regulator of pancreatic cancer stem cell (PCSC) function in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). The researchers found that depletion of HNF1A resulted in growth inhibition, apoptosis, and impaired tumorsphere formation in PCSCs. Conversely, overexpression of HNF1A increased PCSC marker expression and tumorsphere formation in pancreatic cancer cells and drove PDA cell growth. Depletion of HNF1A in xenografts impaired tumor growth and depleted PCSC marker-positive cells in vivo. Additionally, the team established an HNF1A-dependent gene signature in PDA cells that significantly correlated with reduced survivability in patients. These findings may help develop treatment strategies that exploit HNF1A's role as a novel oncogene in PDA.
Wnt signaling is crucial for tissue homeostasis, but dysregulation can cause cancer. The activation of G proteins in Wnt signaling through the Frizzled receptors (FZDRs) has been controversial. A study shows that FZDRs activate G proteins and triggers non-canonical Wnt signaling through a Dishevelled-binding protein called Daple, which contains a Gα-binding and activating motif that activates Gαi proteins and an adjacent domain that connects Wnt stimulation to G protein activation. Dysregulation of Daple can impact both tumor initiation and progression to metastasis. Non-canonical Wnt signaling antagonizes the canonical β-catenin/TCF/LEF pathway, suppressing tumorigenesis, but enhancing cancer invasion/metastasis via activation of Rac1 and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. FZDRs belong to the GPCR superfamily that activate G proteins, and Daple is identified as a non-receptor Guanine nucleotide exchange factor for trimeric G proteins. Daple interacts with trimeric G protein Gαi3 and binds to inactive Gαi3 with submicromolar affinity at aa 1668–1683. It selectively binds to Gαi subunits but not Gαo.
Researchers have developed a new method called Single-Cell Magneto-Optical Capture (scMOCa) that can isolate rare live cells within a heterogeneous population based solely on visual traits, such as movement, shape, or location. scMOCa works by tagging cells of interest using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads attached to their membranes using confocal microscope lasers, followed by isolation with a simple magnet. The method was tested on cells with biologically relevant properties, such as multinucleated cells and cells with the ability to resolve ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage foci. The technology is rapid, efficient, and cost-effective, allowing the characterization of phenotypes of interest in small cell populations. The researchers also demonstrate the utility of scMOCa for capturing multinucleated cells and differentiating adipocytes.
Researchers have used a combination of X-ray crystallography and electron cryomicroscopy to determine the structures of the soluble monomers of α-Xenorhabdolysins (Xax) toxins, which comprise XaxA and XaxB, and the cryo-EM structure of the XaxAB pore complex from Xenorhabdus nematophila. The pore-forming toxins are used by bacterial pathogens to attack host cells, but the molecular mechanism of action of Xax toxins has been poorly understood due to a lack of structural information. The researchers found that XaxA acts as an activator and stabilizer for XaxB, which forms the actual transmembrane pore. The structures reveal that XaxA and XaxB are built similarly and appear as heterodimers in the 12-15 subunits containing pore, classifying XaxAB as a bi-component α-pore-forming toxin. Xax toxins are found in other entomopathogenic bacteria such as Photorhabdus luminescens, as well as human pathogenic bacteria such as Yersinia enterocolitica and Proteus mirabilis.
The development of antiviral drugs is challenged by drug resistance. Combination therapy has been found to be effective for HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV), but specific targets for HCV antivirals have not yet been discovered. Understanding barriers to drug resistance can reduce the use of multiple drugs. Drugs that come with high fitness costs for drug resistance, like Sofosbuvir and integrase inhibitors of HIV, have proven to be effective. Branched DNA probe technology can be used to detect individual genomes in infected cells. Dominant drug targeting can also be effective in suppressing viral drug resistance. For the NS3/4A target, drug-resistant genomes are cis-dominant. Sofosbuvir and R1479, which exact a similar cost to viral fitness to drug-resistant variants, generate few resilient viral variants.
Researchers have developed an approach called PRIME (Personalized Reconstruction of Metabolic models) which utilises molecular and phenotypic data to build a large number of individual models of normal and cancer cell-lines that predict metabolic phenotypes including identifying drug targets that inhibit cancerous but not normal cell proliferation. PRIME was successful in inferring the prognosis of cancer patients based on their cell-specific models and may enhance future selective anticancer therapies.
A study has suggested that natural gender differences in resistance to bacterial pneumonia indicate a novel mechanism for host defence via NOS3, which might open up therapeutic strategies to reduce secondary bacterial pneumonia after influenza. The study revealed that in mice, female estrogen-treated and normal females showed greater systemic resistance to pneumococci than males via the activation of constitutive lung macrophage nitric oxide synthase-3 (NOS3). Greater female resistance was also observed in longer duration survival studies. To explore the potential role of reactive nitrogen intermediates in the resistance, the study tested the effect of NOS inhibitors on bacterial killing by female murine AMs in vitro. The study concluded that the functional importance of NOS3 pathway has been established; pharmacologic targeting of NOS3 with statins or another small-molecule compound enhanced macrophage bacterial killing, improved bacterial clearance, and increased host survival in both primary and secondary (post-influenza) pneumonia.
The article discusses the importance of understanding cell heterogeneity and the limitations of traditional labeling techniques in studying it. The authors developed a new high-precision infrared laser-evoked gene operator heat-shock system for precise single-cell labeling and tracing in vivo. The technology was used to study the hematopoietic potential of hemogenic endothelium in zebrafish and revealed the presence of myeloid unipotent and myeloid-lymphoid bipotent subtypes. The article also discusses the challenges of existing single-cell lineage tracing methodologies and how the new technology overcomes these challenges. A two-photon fluorescent thermometer was utilized to measure the temperature rise and achieve precise single-cell labeling. The article includes detailed technical information and experimental results of the technology in use.
A study has explored the basis for four crude oil injury phenotypes in the early life stages of Atlantic haddock, which include defects in cardiac form and function, craniofacial development, ionoregulation and fluid balance, and cholesterol synthesis and homeostasis. The research used an RNA-seq approach to assess the effects of crude oil on the haddock’s developmental stages. The results suggest a link between intracellular calcium cycling and excitation-transcription coupling in the dysregulation of heart and jaw morphogenesis in fish. The findings underline the need to understand the mechanistic relationships between marine life stressors and adverse health outcomes in order to produce adverse outcome pathways that will help protect against potential oil spills.
Researchers investigated the noise that is inherent in retinoic acid (RA) signaling within the context of patterning of hindbrain segments in zebrafish embryos. The team utilized fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) and phasor analysis to directly measure endogenous RA in vivo and determine how modulation of this noise affects hindbrain segment patterning. They found that RA forms a noisy gradient, and cells use different intracellular binding proteins to attenuate noise in RA levels. The researchers also discovered that increasing noise disrupts the proper patterning of the hindbrain. The study shed light on cellular mechanisms of noise regulation that are likely to play important roles in other aspects of physiology and disease.
ApoE4 is a genotype that is commonly linked to late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). This is due to a trafficking defect at the level of the early endosome caused by ApoE4's tendency to unfold and aggregate in acidic environments. Researchers have found that inhibiting NHE6, the primary proton leak channel in the early endosome, in rodents can reverse the ApoE4-induced recycling block of ApoE receptors and glutamate receptors. This discovery could lead to new approaches for preventing late-onset AD.
The origin of repetitive proteins is thought to have arisen from the amplification of subdomain-sized peptides. In particular, the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) family is one of the most widespread. The study identified potential homologs of the TPR in non-repetitive proteins including the putatively ancient ribosomal protein S20 (RPS20). The ability of the RPS20 hairpin to form a TPR fold was evaluated, and structures identical to natural TPRs were obtained for variants with 2-5 point mutations per repeat. The study concludes that TPRs could have arisen by amplification from an ancestral helical hairpin.
A recent study has identified key regulators of sexual maturation in the nervous system of C. elegans, a species of nematode worm that undergoes sexual maturation through four larval stages. The heterochronic pathway, which controls stage-specific events during larval development and the transition to adulthood, was shown to play a role in the timing of adult-specific sexual behavior in C. elegans, including the remodeling of postmitotic neurons and the activation of male-specific tail tip morphogenesis. Specifically, the Makorin lep-2 and lncRNA lep-5 were found to regulate maturation cell-autonomously, indicating that genetic timing information is widely distributed across the nervous system. The conservation of Makorin function was demonstrated by the finding that human MKRN3 delays sexual maturation in C. elegans. The study sheds light on the mechanisms that regulate sexual maturation and highlights the conservation of these mechanisms across species.
The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) US12 family of genes plays a key role in regulating natural killer (NK) ligands, adhesion molecules, and cytokine receptors, according to a study. Researchers used a multiplexed proteomics approach to address the ten gene family, notably US12, US14, US18 and US20, which were found to have a novel NK cell evasion function. The majority of the HCMV genes are not essential for virus replication, however, many of the genes are implicated in suppressing host immune responses. The US12 gene family has been known to impact HCMV tropism, virion maturation, and immune evasion. HCMV invests a great deal of its coding capacity to inhibit NK cell activation.
The tumor suppressor protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor-type kappa (PTPRK) has been identified as a negative regulator of Wnt signaling in both human cancer cells and the Spemann organizer of Xenopus embryos. PTPRK acts via the E3 ubiquitin ligase ZNRF3, a negative regulator of Wnt signaling, promoting Wnt receptor degradation which is also expressed in the Spemann organizer. Deficiency of Xenopus Ptprk increases Wnt signaling, leading to reduced expression of Spemann organizer effector genes and inducing head and axial defects. In PTPRK-RSPO3 recurrent cancer fusions, both fusion partners encode ZNRF3 regulators, providing a rationale for its tumor suppressive function. Our study suggests that in PTPRK-RSPO3 gene fusions, truncation of PTPRK and increased expression of RSPO3 in fact work in the same direction, impairing ZNRF3 to augment Wnt signaling.
The magnocellular mediodorsal thalamus (MDmc) is a crucial element in adaptive decision-making. It enables organisms to explore alternative options while also updating their current choice strategy. While MDmc plays a critical role in rapid discovery and persistence with rewarding options in uncertain and changing environments, its causal contribution is not entirely understood. However, MDmc damage can impair adaptive decision-making, which can be observed in mammals, particularly monkeys. The MDmc interconnects with several other parts of the prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), amygdala, and ventral striatum. MDmc plays a critical role in inhibiting or shifting from search to persist modes of responding. It helps coordinate the rapid integration of choices and outcomes for adaptive decision-making, particularly in rapid adaptive updating of stimulus values. However, MDmc damage does not replicate the deficits observed after selective lesions to interconnected prefrontal regions, suggesting that its role is distinct from any individual cortical target. Rather, MDmc's functional role may also directly regulate decisions about when to shift from a search strategy to a persist strategy. Monkeys with MDmc damage were shown to be impaired at re-selecting a sampled alternative after a search choice that yielded a reward due to an inability to use reward to promote choice repetition after switching to an alternative option. This was due to a diminished influence of recent past choices and the last outcome to guide future behavior.
Boron uptake in Arabidopsis thaliana involves two types of transporters, NIPs and BORs, both of which are regulated by boron. Mathematical modeling shows that slower regulation of these transporters leads to oscillatory behavior, which can harm plant growth. Within a polarized tissue context, rapid transport dynamics are necessary to ensure nutrient homeostasis and avoid instabilities in concentration levels. Swift transporter regulation is necessary, and the protein levels of transporters are regulated by production and degradation rates.
The postembryonic brain grows and develops through sensory experience, which can lead to neuroplasticity, and this can happen through structural and functional changes in existing neurons, or through neurogenesis, which is the generation of new neurons. In larval zebrafish, movement is shown to promote self-renewal of neural precursors, creating an expanded pool of forebrain neural precursors. Physical cues associated with swimming (movement) increase neurogenesis, and these cues seem to be conveyed by dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in the zebrafish body. Movement is therefore shown to be vital in neurogenic brain growth, and this sensorimotor association may explain the link between physical activity and cognitive function in children. The relationship between movement and neurogenesis is investigated in larval zebrafish, and the results demonstrate that movement and physical feedback associated with movement may provide a simple mechanism through which motor and brain development become coupled early in life.
The article discusses the use of alternative binding proteins, particularly Affimer proteins, as complementary reagents to antibodies for various molecular and cellular applications. Antibodies have been widely used as molecular recognition reagents to study protein expression, localization, and interactions, but there are concerns about the difficulty in sourcing validated and renewable antibodies. The development of alternative binding proteins, such as Affimers, provides the opportunity for rapid and cost-effective generation of renewable binding reagents for studying protein function in vitro, in vivo, and for proteomic projects. The article reports on the outcomes of more than 350 successful screens performed by the BioScreening Technology Group in the University of Leeds and Leeds NHS Teaching Hospital Trust to isolate highly specific and renewable binding reagents using Affimer proteins against various targets. The article also discusses how Affimers can be used to target specific proteins or subsets of a family of proteins, such as Src-Homology 2 (SH2) domains, for greater selectivity in in vivo studies.
Observation of the same action can induce distinct motor contagions depending on whether prediction errors are present or not, according to a study by researchers at the University of Tokyo. A new motor contagion is induced when the observation is accompanied by prediction errors. Participants were given different instructions during observations of either baseball pitching or simple arm reaching. Those who thought the pitcher in the video was aiming for different spots (nPE) threw progressively towards where the pitcher predominantly threw the ball, whereas those who thought the pitcher in the video was aiming for the centre of the target (PE) threw progressively away from where the pitcher predominantly threw the ball. However, the effects on the throwing action did not result in greater spatial variability in the hit locations.
CD8+ T cell anergy, a mechanism of peripheral tolerance, has been poorly investigated in reference to immunotherapy. This study used pancreatic islet allograft models and CD3 antibody therapy to demonstrate selective depletion of intragraft CD8+ lymphocytes leading to long-standing anergy of remaining CD8+ T-cells marked by absence of cytotoxic/inflammatory gene expression. This sustained unresponsiveness required the presence of alloantigens. The study also identified a cell intrinsic regulatory link between the TGFbeta and the PD-1/PD-L1 pathways. CD3 antibodies induced tolerance by selectively targeting and depleting activated CD8+ T-cell effectors within the graft. Lastly, it was discovered that CD8+ T-cells become anergic after escaping this deletion, and inhibitory receptor expression (PD-1, PD-L1, and LAG3) was upregulated.
The transcription factor Mafb drives the formation of auditory ribbon synapses, which are critical for hearing, but how neurons acquire features distinct to each synapse remains unknown. Mafb regulates SGNs to differentiate the large postsynaptic density characteristic of the ribbon synapse thus developing the correct number and types of synapses that are critical for hearing. Mafb is a lineage-specific intrinsic regulator in SGNs for post-synaptic specification of ribbon synapses, and it offers a new entry point for treating hearing loss. Mafb is expressed throughout auditory synaptogenesis and is critical for the ability of SGNs to form specialized connections.  Mafbflox allele provides an effective tool for conditional control of Mafb function.
The document discusses the phenomenon of people preferring to know their fate in advance when anticipating uncertain future outcomes, and suggests that this is because reward prediction errors carried by advance information can boost the level of anticipation. The authors present a reinforcement-learning model and empirical behavioral studies to support their hypothesis, and suggest that this boosted anticipation drives risk-seeking behaviors, particularly in gambling. They also discuss the utility of anticipation and how the level of anticipation can be boosted by prediction errors caused by cues that resolve reward uncertainty. The document concludes with a discussion of a behavioral and neural experiment involving macaque monkeys that supports the authors' model.
The document discusses the discovery of various biological conflict systems in multicellular prokaryotes, which use thresholding mechanisms, proteolytic cascades, and hypervariable effectors to limit the spread of invasive entities, such as viruses, in multicellular or social contexts. The use of chaperones in thresholding mechanisms is also discussed. These conflict systems are predominantly found in bacteria with complex development and multicellular organization, suggesting a link between these features and strongly regulated effector responses to invasive entities. The document also describes the systematic procedure used to identify these conflict systems and their analogs.
A study using zebrafish embryos as a model system has revealed that Vg1, a member of the TGF-beta protein family, plays a crucial role in the induction of mesendoderm during embryonic development. Failure to form endoderm and head and trunk mesoderm was observed in zebrafish embryos without maternally provided vg1. Although Nodal, another TGF-beta-related signal, is processed and secreted without Vg1, it requires Vg1 for its endogenous activity. Conversely, Vg1 is unprocessed and only secreted, processed and active in the presence of Nodal. Co-expression of Nodal and Vg1 results in heterodimer formation and mesendoderm induction. The study also revealed that Vg1 is required for the auto-induction, but not initiation, of Nodal gene expression. The results suggest that mesendoderm induction relies on the combination of maternal and ubiquitous Vg1, and zygotic and localized Nodal.
Prairie voles form monogamous pair bonds that are maintained through selective aggression towards other conspecifics. This study investigated the neural mechanisms that mediate pair bond maintenance using both behavioral and anatomical techniques. The study found that pair bonding up-regulates mRNA expression for genes encoding D1-like dopamine receptors and dynorphin, as well as enhances stimulated dopamine release within the nucleus accumbens. The study also found that activation of kappa-opioid receptors mediates social avoidance and that alterations in KOR binding density within the NAc shell of paired males contribute to the neuroprotective effect of pair bonding against drug reward. The study suggests that motivational and valence processing systems interact to mediate the maintenance of social bonds.
Highly polymorphic MHC class I molecules are crucial in the adaptive immune response to viruses and disease. In chickens and humans it has been found that the breadth of peptide presentation and level surface expression of class I molecules are inversely correlated, and that this relationship correlates with protective responses against infectious pathogens (such as Marek's disease virus leading to lethal tumours in chickens, and the progression of HIV infection to AIDS in humans). Differences in peptide binding repertoire define two groups of MHC class I molecules, described as generalists and specialists for different modes of pathogen resistance. Promiscuous peptide binding may confer resistance to some pathogens, and the basis for the cell surface expression polymorphism may relate to different strategies for resistance to pathogens.
Researchers have used single-molecule localization microscopy to investigate the mechanisms behind neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington’s disease. The researchers found that disease-inducing Huntingtin protein fragments have three dynamic states in living cells, including fast diffusion, dynamic clustering and stable aggregation. The mHtt aggregates form “sticky” decoy traps that impair the ability of key regulators involved in neurological disorders, which could be responsible for the toxicity of aggregates in vivo. The study also found that aromatic amino acids play an unexpected role in promoting protein-mHtt aggregate interactions. This research provides insights into the mechanisms behind neurodegenerative diseases and how mHtt dynamically forms aggregates in living cells.
A study has been carried out to investigate the mechanism of G protein activation, which is a key step in many signaling cascades. The study constructs an atomically detailed model of G protein activation by combining three powerful computational methods: metadynamics, Markov state models (MSMs), and CARDS analysis of correlated motions. The study finds that the rate-limiting step for GDP release correlates with tilting rather than the translation of the GPCR-binding helix 5. β-Strands 1-3 and helix 1 emerge as hubs in the allosteric network that links conformational changes in the GPCR-binding site to disordering of the distal nucleotide-binding site and consequent GDP release. The study provides foundations for understanding disease-implicated G protein mutants, illuminates slow events in allosteric networks, and examines unbinding processes with slow off-rates.
The Dorsal Organ Cool Cells (DOCCs) in Drosophila larvae are highly sensitive to temperature and are critical for cool avoidance. A recent study shows that the DOCCs respond to cooling via Ionotropic Receptors (IRs), a family of sensory receptors known for their role in invertebrate chemical sensing. Specifically, IRs 21a and 25a are required to mediate DOCC responses to cooling and for cool avoidance behavior. The study also found that ectopic expression of IR21a can confer cool-responsiveness in an Ir25a-dependent manner, indicating an instructive role for IR21a in thermosensing. These findings suggest that IR family receptors can function together to mediate remarkable sensitivity in thermosensation.
Short-term (2 hours) monocular deprivation in adult humans leads to a boost in the BOLD response to the deprived eye, changing the ocular dominance of V1 vertices, which is consistent with homeostatic plasticity. The boost is strongest in V1, present in V2, V3, and V4 but absent in V3a and hMT+. The V1 deprivation effect correlates across participants with the perceptual increase of the deprived eye dominance assessed with binocular rivalry. These findings demonstrate that the visual cortex, particularly the ventral pathway, retains a high potential for homeostatic plasticity in the human adult.
The environment created by parents can have lasting effects on their offspring, with potential evolutionary consequences. However, little prior research has considered how parental effects may impact the adaptive value of adult behavioral traits. This study examines this issue via experiments on burying beetles, focusing on parental care. The researchers found that low levels of parental care during larvae stages leads to adult offspring being less successful at raising larger broods and suffering greater mortality as a result. Additionally, high-quality males that raised offspring with low-quality females had greater mortality compared to brothers of equivalent quality that reared larvae with higher quality females. The study identifies three general ways in which parental effects can change the adaptive value of an adult behavioral trait: by influencing associated fitness benefits and costs; by changing the evolutionary outcome of social interactions; and by modifying the expression of behavioral traits that are themselves parental effects. The researchers also develop theoretical models to analyze how these long-term fitness consequences of parental effects might feed back to change optimal levels of parental care.
Scientists have investigated how mammalian sperm maintain the correct swimming direction during sexual reproduction. It is unclear which cues guide spermatozoa on their long journey towards the egg. Researchers report the first quantitative study of mammalian sperm rheotaxis, using microfluidic devices to investigate systematically human and bull sperm swimming over a range of physiologically relevant shear rates and viscosities. The interplay of fluid shear, steric surface-interactions, and chirality of the flagellar beat leads to stable upstream spiralling motion of sperm cells, providing a generic and robust rectification mechanism to support mammalian fertilisation. A minimal mathematical model is presented that accounts quantitatively for the experimental observations.
The protein Ki-67 is commonly used as a marker of cell proliferation in cancer histopathology, but its functions have remained unclear. This paper shows that Ki-67 controls heterochromatin organization, affecting long-range chromatin interactions and gene expression. Altering Ki-67 expression levels did not significantly impact cell proliferation in vivo, indicating that the protein is not required for cell proliferation. Ki-67 silencing also had wide-ranging effects on chromatin organization, disrupting heterochromatin compaction and relocalizing trimethylated histones. Mutant mice lacking Ki-67 expression were viable and fertile and did not exhibit any obvious defects in tissue morphology or differentiation. These results suggest that Ki-67 links heterochromatin organization to cell proliferation by spatially organizing heterochromatin, thereby controlling gene expression.
A new diagnostic model has been developed to differentiate between severe malaria and severe illness not primarily caused by malaria, which could improve the accuracy of genetic association studies of patients with severe malaria. Current diagnostic methods can be imprecise, particularly in areas of high transmission where it is difficult to distinguish severe malaria from bacterial sepsis in young children. The model uses platelet and white count data to estimate the probability of severe malaria diagnosis and identified that around one-third of cases in a Kenyan cohort did not have severe malaria. The researchers propose a data-tilting approach to reduce false discovery rates and improve statistical power in genome-wide association studies. By adding full blood count metadata to severe malaria cohorts, more accurate quantitative analyses in case-control studies and increased statistical power could be achieved.
Researchers have investigated the evolution of the Solanaceae family-specific, trichome-localized acylsugar biosynthetic pathway to understand how a novel class of plant-defense related metabolites emerged and diversified in the Solanaceae family. Their findings not only catalog the diversity of acylsugars in different plants of the family but also illustrate the varied mechanisms by which the specialized metabolic pathway evolved. Acylsugars are lineage-specific plants' specialized metabolites detected in multiple genera of the Solanaceae family including Solanum (King et al., 1990; Schilmiller et al., 2010; Ghosh et al., 2014), Petunia (Kroumova and Wagner, 2003; Liu et al., 2017), Datura (Forkner and Hare, 2000) and Nicotiana (Kroumova and Wagner, 2003; Kroumova et al., 2016). These compounds, produced in the tip cell of trichomes on leaf and stem surfaces, typically consist of a sucrose or glucose core esterified to groups derived from fatty acid or branched chain amino acid metabolism.
A study conducted on the hippocampal–entorhinal system has shown that it can represent relationships between objects using a metric that depends on associative strength. The system can extract a map-like knowledge structure even in situations where relationships are non-spatial, discrete, and unavailable to conscious awareness. Animals have the ability to extract abstract relationships between different types of objects, events and other conceptual information, which can help them navigate through space with minimal experience. The study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) adaptation to investigate how a noncontinuous organising dimension can represent discrete objects' relationships in a neuronal representational structure. The study revealed that distance measures between objects reflect their distribution of future states rather than in Euclidian space. This map can facilitate the rapid computation of values in a reinforcement learning world, allowing for the prediction of state space.
New research shows that a lack of a protein known as Tgfb1i1, which regulates Paired-homeobox 6 (PAX6) expression, leads to sustained light response in the retina. Tgfb1i1 interacts with LIM domain transcription factors Lhx3 and Isl1 to inhibit a "GABAergic" subtype of amacrine cells, responsible for inverting signals to produce inhibitory neurotransmitters such as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine. In mice lacking Tgfb1i1, PAX6 expression supports the GABAergic amacrine cell fate maintenance, resulting in more transient light responses after sustained stimulation. The data suggests that antagonistic regulation of the α-enhancer activity by PAX6 and the LIM protein complex is necessary for the establishment of an inner retinal circuitry, which controls visual adaptation.
The role of experience and training in improving perceptual learning and decision making is the subject of this study. While previous studies have shown that experience and training facilitate our ability to extract and discriminate meaningful patterns from cluttered environments, the mechanisms that the human brain employs to suppress task-irrelevant information and optimize perceptual decisions through training remain largely unknown. The study employs fMRI with MR Spectroscopy measurements of GABA to examine the role of suppression in perceptual learning. The results suggest that task-dependent GABAergic inhibition relates to functional brain plasticity and behavioral improvement, with GABAergic inhibition in the occipito-temporal cortex relating to dissociable learning mechanisms: decreased GABA for noise filtering, while increased GABA for feature template retuning. Perturbing cortical excitability during training with tDCs alters performance in a task-specific manner, providing evidence for a direct link between suppression and behavioral improvement.
The article discusses the dynamics of E. faecalis communities exposed to antibiotics and how molecular events influence microbial dynamics on the population scale. The study showed that the dynamics of E. faecalis communities exposed to antibiotics can be surprisingly rich, revealing scenarios where increasing population size or delaying drug exposure can promote population collapse. The density-dependent feedback loops couple population growth and antibiotic efficacy when communities include drug-resistant subpopulations, leading to a wide range of behavior, including population survival, collapse, or one of two qualitatively distinct bistable behaviors where survival is favored in either small or large populations. The article also speaks about the role of community-level dynamics for understanding and predicting how bacteria respond and adapt to antibiotics. Finally, it discusses a simple mathematical model that ascribes density-dependent drug efficacy to a change in the effective concentration of the antibiotic.
The efficient coding principle suggests that sensory systems are optimized to process natural input stimuli. This principle has been used to explain processing in the sensory periphery but can it be extended to cortical sensitivity to complex sensory features? The authors propose that the salience of complex sensory signals increases with the variability, or unpredictability, of corresponding signals across natural stimuli. They test this hypothesis by analyzing local multi-point spatial correlations in central visual processing and comparing the spatial variation of local patterns of light across natural images with human sensitivity to manipulations of the same patterns in synthetic images. They find that human sensitivity to these multi-point elements of visual form is tuned to their variation in the natural world. The study suggests that the efficient coding principle applies to higher-order sensory features in the central visual processing and operates on a regime in which sensitivity increases with feature variability.
Researchers have identified a new function for the CED-3 caspase gene, which has only previously been associated with promoting apoptosis. The gene has now been shown to have a non-apoptotic function in regulating multiple developmental events through proteolytic inactivation, and is involved in miRNA processing. The discovery was made through an enhancer screen for developmental defects caused by compromising both global miRISC function and individual genes in Caenorhabditis elegans. The research shows that tackling genetic redundancy is critical to uncovering specific functions associated with miRNAs and other gene expression regulatory mechanisms.
The interaction between homeostatic and associative learning processes in organisms remains poorly understood. To address this gap, the authors propose a computational integration of two brain circuits: the hypothalamic homeostatic regulation (HR) system and the cortico-basal ganglia reinforcement learning (RL) mechanism. After giving a heuristic sketch of the theory, the authors show several analytical, behavioural, and neurobiological results. The authors provide a normative explanation for temporal discounting of reward, and show that the rewarding value of an outcome can be defined as the consequent reduction of drive. The theory reconciles the RL and HR theories in terms of their normative assumptions: reward acquisition and physiological stability are mathematically equivalent behavioural objectives. Finally, the authors discuss limitations of the theory, compare it with other theoretical accounts of motivation and internal state regulation, and outline testable predictions and future directions.
Researchers at the University of Massachusetts have used an MT bridge assay to investigate dynein motility in three dimensions. Dynein has a net preference to move along a right-handed helical path, demonstrating that it generates torque during cargo transport. Unlike other cytoskeletal motors that produce torque in a specific direction, dynein generates torque in either direction, resulting in bidirectional helical motility. It was found that dynein moves in a helical trajectory around the MT, allowing it to avoid roadblocks in dense cytoplasmic environments during cargo transport.
Researchers have studied the mechanism of West Nile Virus (WNV) membrane fusion during viral cell entry through examining hemifusion of WNV virus-like particles (VLPs) in a single particle format. They have introduced specific mutations into the viral surface protein to relate their influence on fusion kinetics to structural features of the protein. The researchers found that at the level of individual E subunits, trimer formation and membrane engagement of the threefold clustered fusion loops are rate-limiting, and that hemifusion requires at least two adjacent trimers. They suggested that this description may apply more generally to fusion of intracellular vesicles and to fusion of two cells.
Researchers have developed a new high-throughput Viral Chromosome Conformation Capture (V3C-seq) assay that allows genome-wide identification of the direct interactions of the Minute Virus of Mice (MVM) genome with distinct regions of the cellular chromosome. The study found that MVM homes in on sites of pre-existing endogenous DNA damage to initiate infection at sites that provide cellular factors necessary for its replication before moving on to newly induced sites as infection progresses. The V3C-seq assay should be useful for characterizing the interaction of many DNA viruses that associate with the cellular genome and provide a useful tool to characterize the molecular events leading to the initiation of infection.
The function of Lrp4 in the brain is not yet understood, but research has shown that mice without Lrp4 die at birth due to the failure to form neuromuscular synapses. However, when Lrp4 was expressed selectively in muscle, rescued mice survived into adulthood, showing profound deficits in cognitive tasks that assess learning and memory. Studies done on hippocampal synapses showed a reduction in spine density and frequency of spontaneous release events which were related to their inability to induce long-term potentiation. The rescued mice showed poor performance in several learning and memory paradigms, demonstrating that Lrp4 has a critical role in the CNS. This research provides a direction for evaluating patients with Lrp4 mutations or auto-antibodies for neurological deficits.
The article discusses how people use base rate information inconsistently in decision making, and specifically focuses on the inverse base rate effect (IBRE), whereby participants tend to classify ambiguous stimuli sharing features of both common and rare categories as members of the rare category. The article proposes a hybrid model, which posits that similarity and dissimilarity-based evidence both contribute to IBRE, and tests it using functional magnetic resonance imaging data collected from human subjects completing an IBRE task. The article discusses how computational models of IBRE have posited that it arises either from associative similarity-based mechanisms or from dissimilarity-based processes that may depend on higher-level inference. The article examines the cognitive and neural evidence for similarity-based models and presents dissimilarity-based models as an alternative proposition. The article then tests their dissGCM by incorporating its predictions into fMRI data analysis collected from participants completing a standard IBRE task.
Researchers used unbiased protein affinity purification and co-IP assays to identify two subunits, ZNF644 and WIZ, that are key regulators of the histone methyltransferase G9a/GLP complex, which mediates H3K9 methylation and transcriptional repression at specific gene loci. The subunits were found to interact with the transcription activation domains of G9a and GLP respectively, and contain multiple zinc finger motifs that recognize consensus DNA sequences. ZNF644 and WIZ target G9a and GLP to chromatin and mediate the G9a/GLP complex-dependent H3K9 methylation and gene repression. The N-terminus of ZNF644 interacts with the TAD of G9a while the C-terminus of WIZ interacts with the TAD of GLP. Finally, both ZNF644 and WIZ were identified as chromatin-bound proteins.
The survival of the African trypanosome parasite, Trypanosoma brucei, relies on switches in its Variant Surface Glycoprotein (VSG) coat through antigenic variation. VSG switching is achieved through frequent homologous recombination, which is believed to require locus-specific initiation. Recent research indicates that DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) may play a role in VSG switch initiation. This study investigated whether VSG switch initiation occurs through induction of DSBs or other DNA damage. The authors found that a RecQ helicase, RECQ2, helps to repair DNA breaks, but its loss increases VSG switching by recombination. Furthermore, mapping genome replication dynamics reveals that the transcribed VSG expression site is the only telomeric site that is early replicating, thereby revealing a model for antigenic variation based on replication-derived DNA fragility. These results suggest that VSG switch initiation may be mechanistically linked to DNA replication rather than direct generation of DSBs.
Coordination of cellular processes is crucial for maintaining cell envelope integrity during division in Gram-negative bacteria. The coordination of the tripartite cell envelope is necessary for constriction of the inner membrane, peptidoglycan and outer membrane. In this study, it is suggested that two envelope machines, the PBP1B-LpoB complex and Tol system, are physically and functionally coordinated via YbgF or CpoB. This coordination leads to the linking of peptidoglycan synthesis with outer membrane invagination, as well as selective modulation of PBP1B cross-linking activity. CpoB is required for proper PBP1B function, and loss of this coordination leads to defects in outer membrane integrity, illustrating the importance of mechanisms that ensure coordination of cell division processes across the envelope.
The article questions the existence of phase-phase coupling (n:m phase-locking) between theta and gamma oscillations in the rat hippocampus, which has recently been reported in literature. By analyzing simulated and actual hippocampal local field potentials, the study finds that filtering can generate spurious coupling levels in white noise and hippocampal LFPs, leading to false detection of significant coupling. The study suggests that studies investigating phase-phase coupling should rely on appropriate statistical controls and be aware of confounding factors.
PARP-7 is a mono (ADP-ribosyl) transferase whose substrates and biological activities are not fully understood. The PARP-7 protein contributes to several cancer-related biological endpoints in ovarian cancer cells. Our study identified an extensive PARP-7 ADP-ribosylated proteome with important roles in cancer-related cellular functions. PARP-7 plays a role in transcription, RNA metabolism, translation in response to viral infections, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation. Knockdown of PARP7 resulted in a reduction of cancer growth, migration, and invasion. The RNA-seq analysis revealed statistically significant changes in 834 genes, with both increased and decreased expression observed. GO analyses revealed the enrichment of genes encoding proteins with roles in cell-cell adhesion, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and gene regulation. PARP-7 localizes predominantly in the cytoplasm of OVCAR4 cells. We identified PARP-7 MARylated substrates in ovarian cancer cells using a chemical genetics approach. We found that PARP-7 MARylates α-tubulin to promote microtubule instability, which may regulate ovarian cancer cell growth and motility. PARP-7 mRNA levels were lower in ovarian cancer patient samples compared to non-cancerous tissue, but PARP-7 protein nonetheless contributes to several cancer-related biological endpoints in ovarian cancer cells. The PARP7 gene was identified in a susceptibility locus for ovarian cancer in a genome-wide association study. Thus the observed effects of PARP-7 on cancer-related endpoints are not restricted to OVCAR4 cells.
The study investigates the effects of long-term balancing selection on genetic diversity in the flowering plant genus Capsella, which has undergone parallel species-wide bottlenecks. The researchers find that ancestral variation preferentially persists at immunity related loci, and that the maintenance of these alleles is the predominant driver of genomic variability after a population bottleneck. The study also examines the consequences of selfing, which reduces genetic diversity, effective recombination rate, and the likelihood of heterozygous SNPs. The researchers examine population structures and gene flow between C. rubella and C. grandiflora and compared the likelihood of demographic models. They find that gene flow is ongoing between the species, consistent with interspecific crosses often producing fertile offspring with C. rubella as the paternal parent.
In the development of the nervous system, commissural axons must cross the midline despite the presence of repellant ligands. In Drosophila, the endosomal sorting receptor Commissureless prevents premature responsiveness to the midline repellant Slit by reducing surface expression of the Slit receptor Roundabout1 (Robo1). This study describes a distinct mechanism to inhibit Robo1 repulsion and promote midline crossing, in which Roundabout2 (Robo2) binds to and prevents Robo1 signaling. Robo2 is expressed in midline cells during the early stages of commissural axon guidance, and over-expression of Robo2 can rescue robo2-dependent midline crossing defects non-cell autonomously. Furthermore, the pro-crossing activity of Robo2 is independent of its cytoplasmic domain and is unlikely to be caused solely by a dominant-negative effect of the truncated receptor. Overall, at least two independent mechanisms have evolved in Drosophila to overcome Slit-Robo1 repulsion in pre-crossing commissural axons.
The survival and fate of naive CD4 T cells are influenced by their continuous interaction with self-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) ligands, which leads to tonic T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. This signaling is crucial for differentiation into induced/peripheral regulatory T cells. The signaling cascade in the TCR pathway has been studied, and it has been shown that an increase in intracellular calcium levels modulates the phenotype of naive CD4 T cells and increases their sensitivity to regulatory T-cell polarization signals. This process depends on the activation of the calcineurin pathway. The study demonstrated that calcium-mediated activation of the calcineurin pathway shapes both the phenotype and effector potential of naive CD4 T cells in the steady-state. The strength of the activating TCR signals influences the subsequent polarization of CD4 TN cells (pre-immune T cell repertoire), and strong signals may lead to TH1 and T follicular helper cell differentiation. The findings suggest that the greater self-reactivity of Ly-6C- CD4 TN cells towards self-MHC enhances their sensitivity to iTreg-cell polarization signals. The study identified several genes that were overexpressed in Ly-6C- CD4 TN cells, and these genes are also characteristic of Treg cells.
Researchers have succeeded in structurally analysing the assembly mechanism of a nucleocapsid, a viral RNA genome, which is packaged by the nucleoprotein N, and is common to all mononegavirales. The human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is of this order of viruses causing serious respiratory tract illness in children. The findings reveal how P inhibits the self-assembly of the nucleoprotein complement and transition to RNA-bound state. The results show a role for the C-terminal extension of nucleoprotein in directly preventing premature uptake of RNA by folding into the RNA-binding cleft, and suggest a common mechanism of how the growth of the nucleocapsid is orchestrated that highlights an interaction site representing an important antiviral target.
The evolution of the temporo-parietal cortex, a critical specialization of the human brain, is investigated using a computational neuroanatomy approach. Different types of changes in brain architecture, including local expansion of the cortical sheet or changes in connectivity between cortical areas, are distinguished. The extent to which between-species alignment based on cortical myelin can predict changes in connectivity patterns across macaque, chimpanzee, and human is investigated. The study shows that expansion and relocation of brain areas can predict terminations of several white matter tracts in the temporo-parietal cortex, but not the arcuate fasciculus, which underwent additional evolutionary modifications affecting the temporal lobe connectivity pattern. To investigate different forms of cortical reorganization, a framework to test among different forms of cortical reorganization by registering brains together into a single shared coordinate system is proposed. A surface registration between species based on myelin maps using multimodal surface matching is developed to reveal different types of cortical reorganization. The cross-species registration aligns the myelin maps well, and the success of the myelin registration in predicting the tract projections is assessed. The myelin-based registration can predict the tract maps well in both hemispheres, with the notable exception of AF (arcuate fasciculus), indicating that this tract’s differential projections in the human brain are not merely due to relocation of areas. The study demonstrates that the approach can flexibly be extended to include other features of cortical organization and other species, allowing direct tests of comparative hypotheses of brain organization.
Loss of the G1/S checkpoint in cancer cells is usually accompanied by inactivation of the p53 pathway, with the latter seen as essential for suppressing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, research in this area has revealed that p53 loss can lead to a reduction of DNA damage in mouse and human G1-checkpoint-deficient cells. Such cells may enter the S-phase under growth-restricting conditions at the expense of severe replication stress. This can cause decelerated DNA replication, reduced origin firing and the accumulation of DNA double-strand breaks. Loss of p53 allows mitogen-independent proliferation by restoring origin firing and reducing DNA breakage. In vivo and in a teratoma model, loss of p53 reduced DNA breakage. Loss of p53 could promote the growth of incipient cancer cells by reducing replication-stress-induced DNA damage.
The article discusses the mechanism of DNA inversion catalyzed by Hin, a member of the DNA invertase subclass of serine recombinases. Hin is tightly controlled by a nucleoprotein complex containing Fis, which is an accessory protein for the DNA inversion reaction. The study shows that the flexible beta-hairpin arms of Fis form contacts with the DNA binding domain of one subunit of each Hin dimer, which helps promote the remodeling of the Hin dimers into a synaptic tetramer competent for DNA exchange. Additionally, an enhancer element interacts with a localized basic surface on the Hin catalytic domain to complete the assembly of the active Hin tetramer. The article highlights the importance of this nucleoprotein complex, which controls the orientation-specific synapsis and prevents multiple subunit rotations, as being crucial for ensuring intramolecular DNA inversion, a mechanism for gene regulation, viral integration, DNA transposition, chromosome segregation, and programmed genetic diversity.
Galene is a new software tool for image-based correction of sample motion blurring in both time-resolved and conventional fluorescence microscopy data in two and three dimensions, specifically for functional readouts such as fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM). Galene is able to resolve intravital FLIM-FRET images of intra-abdominal organs in murine models and NADH autofluorescence of human dermal tissue imaging subject to a wide range of physiological motions, enabling FLIM imaging in situations where a stable imaging platform is not always possible and rescue previously discarded quantitative imaging data. The approach is outlined and evaluated using intravital imaging of a number of FRET biosensors in vivo in a murine system and in clinical applications by imaging autofluorescence of human skin, as well as with simulations of FLIM data in the presence of sample motion. Galene may also be used to correct conventional fluorescence microscopy data using intravital 3D multispectral imaging data of labelled immune cells in the murine lymph node, highlighting its wider application for intravital imaging applications. The range of amplitudes and frequencies of sample motion that can be reliably corrected covers a broad range of physiologically relevant motions commonly observed during functional intravital imaging and will therefore be of use in a range of in vivo imaging applications. The core motion correction algorithm used by Galene is compared with three open source motion correction packages using intensity-only data.
Scientists have discovered a new class of human antibodies that contain a collagen-binding domain that is also found in human membrane protein LAIR1. In a study published in eLife, researchers reveal the structure of one of these "LAIR1-containing antibodies" and show how it acts as an "adaptor", linking the LAIR1 protein inserted in its hypervariable loop with antigen-binding sites. Most antibodies don't have such a structure; the third hypervariable loop of the heavy chain is the most structurally diverse but the LAIR1-containing antibody's five remaining CDR loops are occluded. The paper discusses how the antibodies were discovered, characteristics of their linkers, as well as the usual length and architectures of CDR loops.
Researchers from the University of Basel and ETH Zurich have identified the mechanism by which bacteria build their flagellum, a long whip-like appendage used for their movement. The study, published in the journal eLife, shows that a simple, injection-diffusion mechanism controls bacterial flagella growth outside the cell. The bacterial flagellum is a self-assembling nanomachine composed of a protein called flagellin; the external tail is made up of tens of thousands of these subunits. The researchers monitored flagella growth outside of cells and found that it decreases with length, with no energy source clearly identifiable. The study therefore explored previously conflicting research and focused on a chain mechanism and the proton motive force-dependent export apparatus found at the base of the flagellum for an answer.

A study of monkeys performing a gambling task suggests that during value-based decisions, the selection of desired economic goods takes priority over selecting the actions that will obtain the goods. The study involved recording from the monkeys' supplementary eye fields during the task, and analysing neuron activity and population state-space dynamics. The findings suggest that the selection of economic goods precedes and guides the selection of actions, and that the two selection steps serve different functions and cannot compensate for each other. The researchers proposed a new sequential decision model to explain the findings.
The heat shock response is a cell reaction to adverse conditions and is regulated by the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1, which is activated by trimerization and DNA binding. Two models are discussed for Hsf1 activation: Hsf1 as a thermosensor itself, and chaperones preventing Hsf1 activation until they are titrated away. Posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation, sumoylation and oxidation of cysteines, contribute to Hsf1 regulation. To understand the mechanism of temperature-induced activation of Hsf1, the conformational dynamics of purified Hsf1 were analyzed by hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry. The study found temperature-dependent unfolding of HR-C and a concomitant increase in HR-A/B, indicating that Hsf1 acts as a thermosensor. The data suggest a kinetic model of Hsf1 trimerization, and show that Hsp90, known to inhibit Hsf1 activation, lowers the midpoint temperature of trimerization and widens the response window.
The gene Acbd7 has been linked to obesity in humans. In this study, it was found that a splice variant isoform of the Acbd7 mRNA is expressed and translated by some neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC) and can produce a bioactive peptide called nonadecaneuropeptide (NDN), which acts as an anorexigenic signal. This signal acts through an uncharacterized endozepine G protein-coupled receptor and via the melanocortin system. ACBD7-producing neurons participate in the hypothalamic leptin signaling pathway, involved in the control of food intake and energy expenditure. The study also found that the production of ACBD7 and NDN in the ARC is impacted by the body's energy status, with levels decreasing during fasting and increasing during refeeding.
Sphingosine (Sph) is a bioactive lipid that plays roles in cellular processes. Limited information is available on the signaling mechanisms and cellular targets of Sph in comparison to ceramide and sphingosine 1-phosphate. This study investigates the role of Sph in intracellular calcium signaling using photoactivatable, or “caged,” Sph. The authors show that uncaging Sph leads to a transient increase in cytosolic calcium, and that this elevation in calcium is not released from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) but from acidic stores via two-pore channel 1 (TPC1). The authors also show that Sph is a positive regulator of calcium release from acidic stores and is involved in the pathophysiology of Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC). The authors suggest that these findings highlight the importance of understanding the interplay between Sph homeostasis, calcium signaling, and autophagy to develop new therapies for lipid storage disorders such as NPC.
The planarian, Schmidtea mediterranea, provides a unique experimental model to study stem cell biology in vivo, including regeneration, fate determination and homeostatic plasticity. Planarian stem cells, known as neoblasts, are a heterogeneous population of pluripotent and lineage-committed cells that provide a powerful system to study adult stem cell self-renewal and differentiation dynamics. The planarian epidermis is one such tissue that undergoes rapid turnover, and therefore can provide insights into the molecular mechanisms regulating stem cell specification in vivo. In this study, researchers investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying neoblast differentiation and how they give rise to multiple cell types, with a particular focus on the epidermal lineage. They identified critical factors enriched in the AGAT-1+ cell population required for epidermal lineage progression, and also identified a conserved transcription factor of the early growth response family, egr-5, that is expressed in post-mitotic progeny cells and is an essential regulator of post-mitotic epidermal fate specification. The study highlights the planarian epidermis as a paradigm to study adult lineage specification in vivo, and to contribute to knowledge of mechanisms required for the proper execution of stem cell fate decisions.

The document introduces a new organizing principle for classifying seizures based on their underlying dynamics, called Taxonomy of Seizure Dynamics (TSD). The TSD is created through bifurcation theory and identifies 16 different dynamotypes that describe the observable characteristics of seizures, including how they start, evolve, and end. The study analyzed over 2000 seizures from multiple centers and found evidence of all 16 dynamotypes in patients with focal onset seizures. The TSD provides a rational way to characterize seizures, complementing current clinical classifications, and could guide future research focused on dynamical properties. It also offers a framework for predicting chemical properties and behaviors of undiscovered or newly synthesized elements, similar to the periodic table of elements. The study identifies a correlation between age and seizure onset and no correlation between seizure type and gender, pathology, or localization. The TSD provides a way to stratify patients and gain a better understanding of the underlying principles governing seizure generation and termination, leading to better patient care.
The study shows that human motor memories can be artificially tagged and retrieved by noninvasive transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). The research was conducted on participants who learned to make reaching movements in the presence of two conflicting force fields, each of which was associated with a distinct tDCS polarity on the sensorimotor cortex. The results indicate that artificial modulation of neural activity in the sensorimotor cortex through tDCS can create context that can lead to the formation and recollection of motor memories. This finding suggests that distinct motor memories can be created depending on the activity pattern in the sensorimotor cortex.
Endothelial cells (ECs) form a barrier lining blood vessels in all tissues and organs, regulating the movement of substances into the tissues. However, little is known about the characteristic gene expression profiles of the ECs present in each organ. Researchers used RNA sequencing technology to identify specific pathways, transporters, and cell-surface markers unique to ECs in the brain, lung, and heart, and found that the cells express genes typically found in surrounding tissues. The study also revealed that ECs express tissue-specific genes involved in vascular barrier function, metabolism, and substrate-specific transport. The tissue-specific heterogeneity of the endothelium is maintained even during systemic inflammatory injury. The findings provide a molecular framework to understand and target organ-specific vascular disease mechanisms. A searchable database of gene expression levels of individual genes in organ-specific EC translatome heterogeneity is available. The study used RiboTag transgenic mouse model to isolate tissue-specific mRNA undergoing translation without cell dissociation. The authors also determined the rank correlation between RiboTagEC samples and the whole-tissue samples to evaluate the molecular signatures of the whole brain, whole lung, and whole heart tissues.
The nucleolar protein interacting with the FHA domain of pKi-67 (NIFK) is a Ki-67-interacting protein associated with poor prognosis and metastasis in cancer. In lung cancer, NIFK expression enhances Ki-67-dependent proliferation and promotes migration, invasion, and metastasis via downregulation of casein kinase 1α (CK1α), a suppressor of pro-metastatic TCF4/β-catenin signaling. This suggests that NIFK is required for lung cancer progression via the RUNX1-dependent CK1α repression that activates TCF4/β-catenin signaling in metastasis and the Ki-67-dependent regulation in cell proliferation. The significance of NIFK in cancer indicates its potential as a prognostic indicator and a promising therapeutic target for lung cancer patients.
The study focuses on understanding the molecular mechanisms of neural crest cell (NCC) development, which contributes to craniofacial tissues in vertebrates. The researchers used TWIST1 BioID-proximity-labeling and network propagation analyses to identify and characterize a TWIST-chromatin regulatory module (TWIST1-CRM) in NCCs. They found that low levels of TWIST1-CRM activity stabilize early NCC signatures and migratory potential by repressing neural stem cell programs. A high level of TWIST1 module activity later commits the cells to ectomesenchyme. The study identified the functional interdependency of TWIST1 and potential neurocristopathy factors in NCC development. The researchers characterized the TWIST1 protein interactome in NCCs using the BioID technique and found 140 putative TWIST1 interactors. They prioritized nine for further characterization, including chromatin regulators and transcription factors that could interact with TWIST1 exclusively in NCCs. The researchers tested the function of the core components of the TWIST1-CRM in vivo using mouse embryos derived from ESCs that carried single-gene or compound heterozygous mutations of Twist1 and the chromatin regulators. The results provided insight into the molecular context of TWIST1 activity and identified functional modules necessary for cranial NCC development.
A molecular tweezer, CLR01, has been shown to have effective anti-amyloid and antiviral activities. It inhibits the formation of seminal amyloids and remodels preformed fibrils that enhance viral infection. It disrupts membrane integrity of HIV and other enveloped viruses, and acts by binding to lysine and arginine residues. It is believed to be a promising topical microbicide to prevent HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. Seminal amyloid fibrils are highly cationic and potently enhance HIV infectivity by capturing HIV virions, promoting HIV infection by several orders of magnitude. The lysine and arginine-specific molecular tweezer specific for Lysine and Arginine residues, CLR01 inhibits amyloid fibrilization by engaging specific lysine or arginine residues. It has a unique binding mode in which the tweezer draws cationic side chains into its torus-shaped cavity and engages the ammonium cation of lysine or the guanidinium cation of arginine with its anionic phosphate group in a tight ion pair. Results from in vitro studies suggested that CLR01 can interfere with the HIV-enhancing activity of amyloidogenic seminal peptides, suggesting its potential use as a microbicide targeting HIV transmission via semen.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) guide Argonaute proteins to messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for repression. One feature of conserved miRNA target sites is the presence of an adenosine nucleotide (t1A) opposite miRNA nucleotide-1, which enhances repression independently of base pairing. This study shows that human Argonaute2 (Ago2) has a pocket that specifically binds adenine nucleobases in the t1 position of target RNAs, with t1A recognized indirectly through a hydrogen-bonding network of water molecules that preferentially interacts with the N6 amine on adenine. Adding a methyl group to the t1A N6 amine reduces target affinity, indicating that adenosine methylation could lead to partial derepression of miRNA targets containing 7mer-A1 or 8mer sites. t1A is not used in the initial search for target sites, but instead functions by increasing the dwell time of Ago2 on target RNA.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) mediate post-transcriptional gene repression through sequence-specific guides directing the silencing complex to target RNAs. Canonical sites involve Watson-Crick pairing between the miRNA seed and complementary 3′ UTRs, but non-canonical interactions also exist. Recent studies found non-canonical sites, but the vast majority of functional sites are canonical. A new contextual quantitative model considers site type and 14 features to predict effectively targeted mRNAs, improving upon previous models and high-throughput in vivo crosslinking approaches. This is driving the latest version of TargetScan that places miRNAs into gene-regulatory networks. Nucleation-bulge sites are non-canonical sites identified from CLIP approaches and possess 8 nt motifs paired to positions 2-8 of cognate miRNA seed, but lack evidence in mediating target mRNA repression, indicating that canonical sites are largely responsible for repression.
Encapsulated ferritin (EncFtn) is a new member of the ferritin superfamily that stores iron within an encapsulin capsid to protect cells from oxidative damage. While EncFtn can act as a ferroxidase, it cannot mineralize iron. Conversely, the encapsulin shell can associate with iron but is not enzymatically active, and EncFtn must be housed within the encapsulin for iron storage. Encapsulin nanocompartments are widely distributed in bacteria and archaea, and the EncFtn-catalyzed sequestration of iron within the encapsulin shell elucidated. The primary sequences of EncFtn proteins have Glu-X-X-His metal coordination sites that are shared features of the ferritin family proteins. EncFtn nanocompartments represent a distinct class of iron storage system where the oxidation and mineralization of iron are distributed between two proteins.
The interaural delay, the time it takes for sound to travel from the source to the ear, varies systematically with spatial direction and is traditionally thought of as a pure time delay that is independent of frequency. However, new research has shown that the interaural delay varies with frequency at a fine scale and preferred delay also varies with sound frequency. This suggests that binaural neurons are tuned to acoustical features of ecological environments rather than to fixed interaural delays. Using recordings from the nerve and brainstem, the study shows that this tuning may emerge from neurons detecting coincidences between input fibers that are mistuned in frequency. In natural environments, the acoustic interaural time delay varies not only with spatial position but also with frequency, due to sound diffraction by the head and early reflections from the ground.
The study explores the sensorimotor basis of chemotaxis in Drosophila larvae and how olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) process signals experienced during olfactory behaviors. Findings reveal that OSNs can act as differentiators that transiently normalize stimulus intensity, which aids in navigation in odor gradients. Results clarify the link between computations carried out at the sensory periphery and action selection underlying navigation in odor gradients, advancing our understanding of how peripheral odor encoding drives action selection during chemotaxis.
Researchers have found that three maternally deposited RNA-binding proteins in Drosophila melanogaster, which play key roles in embryogenesis, are rapidly degraded during the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The destruction of these proteins is triggered by egg activation via the Pan Gu kinase, which stimulates translation of Kdo mRNA, leading to the degradation of ME31B, Trailer Hitch (TRAL), and Cup. The E2 conjugating enzyme UBC-E2H, renamed Marie Kondo, and the E3 CTLH ligase are required for the destruction of these proteins. The degradation of maternal dowry proteins is a coordinated aspect of the MZT critical for animal development.
The Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (IMP2) gene is often overexpressed in human cancers, which is associated with a poorer prognosis. Mice lacking IMP2 exhibit a longer lifespan and a reduced tumor burden at old age. The study showed in a diverse array of human cancer cells that IMP2 overexpression stimulates and IMP2 elimination diminishes proliferation by 50-80%. It was found that IMP2 stabilization of High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) mRNA plus IMP2 stimulated IGF2 production synergistically drive cancer cell proliferation and account for IMP2's tumor promoting action. IMP2's ability to promote proliferation and IGF action requires IMP2 phosphorylation by mTOR. The study demonstrated that overexpression of Grb14 and IGFBP2 slow proliferation of IMP2−/− MEFs through inhibition of IGF1R and Type A insulin receptor-initiated signal transduction. The study shows that depletion of Grb14 and IGFBP2 from those cells restores their proliferation.
This article discusses an experiment that investigated how a group of diverse Escherichia coli bacteria can migrate coherently without complex computational abilities. The researchers found that, despite the constant migrating speed of the group, the drift velocities of individual bacteria decrease from the back to the front. They used a modeling framework to show that this decreasing profile of drift velocities enables the bacterial population to migrate as a pushed wave front. The theoretical analysis and stochastic simulations predicted that the pushed wave front can help a diverse population to stay in a tight group, while diverse individuals perform the same type of mean reverting processes around centers orderly aligned by their chemotactic abilities. The researchers also discovered that the balanced locations of diverse phenotypes are spatially ordered by their chemotaxis abilities.
Mutations in the BEST1 gene cause retinal degenerative diseases that lead to vision loss and blindness. BEST1 encodes a protein called BESTROPHIN1, which is predominantly expressed in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The physiological role of BESTROPHIN1 has been a mystery, but a new study using a patient-specific iPSC-based disease model has shown that BESTROPHIN1 plays an essential role in mediating Ca2+-dependent Cl- current in RPE. The study also demonstrated that the pathological potential of BEST1 mutations can be evaluated and predicted with iPSC-based 'disease-in-a-dish' approach, and patient RPE can be rescued with viral gene supplementation, offering a potential cure for BEST1-associated retinal degenerative diseases. The study provides direct evidence that BEST1 conducts Ca2+-dependent Cl- currents, and outlines the molecular mechanisms of two BEST1 patient mutations.
The antibiotic GE23077 (GE) directly binds to bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP), preventing the binding of initiating nucleotides and thereby preventing transcription initiation. The target-based resistance spectrum for GE is unusually small, reflecting the fact that the GE binding site on RNAP includes residues of the RNAP active center that cannot be substituted without loss of RNAP activity. The GE binding site on RNAP is different from the rifamycin binding site, so covalent linkage of GE to a rifamycin provides a bipartite inhibitor having very high potency and very low susceptibility to target-based resistance. GE is a non-nucleoside RNAP inhibitor that functions through direct interaction with the core catalytic components of the RNAP active-center: the i site, i+1 site, and Mg2+ (I).
Insulin resistance, which is a major risk factor for metabolic diseases like diabetes, is linked to a number of factors such as stress, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the molecular mechanisms behind these links are not well understood. In this study, researchers found that a deficiency in mitochondrial coenzyme Q (CoQ) in adipose and muscle tissue was observed in a range of in vitro insulin resistance models and in insulin-resistant humans, and was concomitant with lower expression of mevalonate/CoQ biosynthesis pathway proteins in most models. The researchers also found that decreasing mitochondrial CoQ triggered mitochondrial oxidants and insulin resistance, while CoQ supplementation in insulin-resistant cell models or mice restored normal insulin sensitivity. These findings suggest that mitochondrial CoQ is a proximal driver of mitochondrial oxidants and insulin resistance and that restoring CoQ may be a therapeutic target for treating insulin resistance.
G protein gated inward rectifier potassium (GIRK) channels play a key role in regulating heart rate by responding to signals from the central nervous system via cholinergic neurotransmission. They are activated by G protein beta-gamma subunits (Gβγ), signaling lipids, and intracellular sodium (Na+). In cardiac pacemaker cells, GIRK1/4 hetero-tetramers and GIRK4 homo-tetramers are responsible for parasympathetic slowing of heart rate. The Na+ binding site of the GIRK1 subunit is defective, but the functional differences between GIRK1/4 hetero-tetramers and GIRK4 homo-tetramers have not been fully understood. Purified proteins and the lipid bilayer system were used to study the activation of these channels by Na+ and Gβγ. GIRK4 homo-tetramers are activated by Na+ and are more responsive to Gβγ stimulation through increased affinity, while GIRK1/4 hetero-tetramers are permanently in a high responsiveness state to Gβγ without Na+. This research has important implications for understanding the mechanisms of cardiac function and disease, as mutations in the GIRK gene can lead to severe diseases such as Atrial Fibrillation and Long QT syndrome.
The process of DNA replication requires minichromosome maintenance (MCM) helicase complexes to be loaded at DNA replication origins during G1 phase in a process known as origin licensing. Pluripotent stem cells with short G1 phases load MCMs faster than differentiated cells with longer G1 phases. MCM loading slows down as G1 lengthens during early stages of differentiation. Rapid origin licensing is an intrinsic characteristic of stem cells which contributes to pluripotency maintenance. The rate of MCM loading is subject to developmental regulation, and it is proposed that rapid origin licensing is a new hallmark of pluripotency. Pluripotent cells with short G1 phases load MCMs significantly faster than differentiated cells with long G1 phases, and slowed MCM loading is a phenomenon common to differentiation towards all germ layers.
Researchers have shown that it is feasible to determine high-resolution protein structures through electron crystallography of three-dimensional (3D) crystals in an electron cryo-microscope (CryoEM). They developed a data collection protocol to collect a full-tilt series in electron diffraction to atomic resolution, using a single tilt series containing up to 90 individual diffraction patterns collected from a single crystal. They then indexed the data from three crystals and used them for structure determination of lysozyme by molecular replacement followed by crystallographic refinement to 2.9 Å resolution. This "MicroED" technique may have wide applicability in structural biology, and it is important as large crystals are required for X-ray crystallography to withstand the high levels of radiation damage received during data collection. However, in electron crystallography, electrons can yield meaningful data from relatively small and thin crystals as electrons interact more strongly with materials than X-rays. The researchers plan to overcome the difficulties of indexing and merging data from hundreds of crystals by collecting a complete diffraction data set from a single crystal while keeping the total dose below 10 electrons per angstrom squared, allowing them to collect multiple diffraction patterns from a single crystal instead of just a single pattern.
Macrophages are a type of immune cell that respond to microbial infections, but some bacterial pathogens are able to grow inside these cells. Researchers have discovered that some intracellular pathogens, including Francisella tularensis and Salmonella enterica, are also capable of exploiting natural host cell processes, such as trogocytosis, to facilitate bacterial spread. Trogocytosis is the exchange of plasma membrane components between cells, during which membranes appear to fuse temporarily. The transferred components retain their orientation and function until recycled via membrane turnover. This phenomenon occurs in different contexts among distinct cell types, including nanotubes, gap junctions, cytonemes and synapses. Trogocytosis can also occur without the transfer of cytosolic material. The direct transfer of infectious bacterial pathogens between cells via cytosolic exchange could be a crucial aspect of some intracellular pathogens' life cycles. F. tularensis and S. enterica bacteria can transfer directly from infected cells to uninfected macrophages through contact and cytosolic exchange-related mechanisms.
A study has linked the extra genetic material found in Down syndrome to increased activation of the interferon pathway, which leads to the deregulation of cellular function in human cells. The report proposes that interferon antagonists could have therapeutic benefits for both those with Down syndrome and typical populations, particularly in relation to leukemia and autoimmune disorders. The report also highlights the need for research into the genetic or environmental modifiers underlying the differences in the effects of the syndrome on individual sufferers.
The conserved Ctf19/CCAN kinetochore sub-complex is responsible for preventing potentially harmful centromere-proximal crossovers in budding yeast during meiosis, which is essential for accurate chromosome segregation. The Ctf19 complex prevents meiotic DNA break formation and independently drives the enrichment of cohesin throughout the broader pericentromere to suppress crossovers. The kinetochore plays a role in defining a chromosome domain that is refractory to crossovers, preventing the incidence of chromosome segregation errors that generate aneuploid gametes. The Ctf19 complex prevents pericentromeric CO recombination and regulates the meiotic recombination landscape by minimizing CO formation.
Researchers have used live-cell imaging and statistical modelling to study transcriptional switching between high and low levels of RNA production in living pituitary tissue. They found multiple levels of transcription rate, indicating that gene expression is not a simple binary "on-off" process, and that immature tissue displayed shorter durations of high-expressing states than adult tissue. In adult pituitary tissue, local cell contacts involving gap junctions allowed for spatial coordination of gene expression. The findings suggest that heterogeneous transcriptional dynamics of single cells may contribute to overall tissue behavior, and may have a common mechanistic basis in tissues and single cells at all stages of development.
The Ton system in gram-negative bacteria is a molecular machine that uses proton motive force (PMF) to transport essential nutrients through outer membrane receptors. This system relies on three inner membrane proteins, ExbB, ExbD, and TonB. The ExbB and ExbD proteins form a proton channel that is energized by PMF and drives uptake through TonB. Recent crystal structures suggest that the ExbB pentamer is the scaffold, but this study presents structures of hexameric complexes of ExbB and ExbD, revealing models for activation/inactivation associated with hexamer and pentamer formation and utilization of proton motive force. The hexameric complex consists of six ExbB subunits and three ExbD transmembrane helices enclosed within the central channel. This research suggests that the ExbB hexamer and ExbD trimer complex could serve as a model for the utilization of PMF in other essential biological processes that are coupled to ion potentials across the lipid membrane, including ATP synthesis, multi-drug excretion, and flagellar motor rotation.
Pyrethroid-treated bednets are effective in preventing malaria, but the prevalence of pyrethroid-resistant mosquitoes in Africa is impeding the deployment of more expensive nets. A study found that new bednets, with or without piperonyl butoxide (PBO), protect against malaria until high levels of resistance are reached. Mathematical models indicate that even low levels of resistance can increase the incidence of malaria due to reduced mosquito mortality and lower overall community protection over the life of the net. The study proposed using information on malaria endemicity, mosquito species, and population prevalence of pyrethroid resistance to predict the public health impact of pyrethroid resistance and choosing the most appropriate net for the epidemiological setting. PBO bednets could be more effective than standard LLINs in some resistance scenarios, but current public health budgets may be constrained.
This study examined rhythmic circuits in the hippocampus during an odor-reward association task in rats. They found that distinct frequencies of theta (4-12 Hz), beta (15-35 Hz), low gamma (35-55 Hz) and high gamma (65-90 Hz) exhibited dynamic amplitude profiles as rats sampled odor cues. Interneurons and principal cells engaged in these rhythmic circuits in a manner related to successful performance of the task. The beta frequency was most correlated with correct performance. The study also observed changes in rhythmic circuits during the nose poke interval that differentiated between correct and incorrect trials. The study concludes that the diversity of rhythms observed in the hippocampus reflects the coordination of distinct information processing and that the presence of the beta15-35Hz rhythm signals a recruitment of cell activity that may be critical for memory function.
Researchers have used cell type-specific transcriptomics to identify pathways involved in the regulation of body weight in neurons that are activated during energy deficit states, such as weight loss. Agouti related protein (AGRP)-expressing neurons are activated during energy deficit and increase appetite and weight gain, whereas Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)-expressing neurons suppress appetite and body weight. The researchers found that AGRP neurons are more sensitive to energy deficit than POMC neurons, and identified cell type-specific pathways involving endoplasmic reticulum-stress, circadian signaling, ion channels, neuropeptides, and receptors. This resource greatly expands molecular insight into neuronal regulation of body weight and may be useful for devising therapeutic strategies for obesity and eating disorders.
The inner ear is a fluid-filled structure that requires maintenance of internal pressure and fluid composition. The endolymphatic sac (ES) is a dead-end epithelial tube connected to the inner ear whose function is unclear. Using live imaging of zebrafish larvae, researchers reveal that the ES undergoes cycles of slow pressure-driven inflation followed by rapid deflation. The absence of these cycles in genetically modified zebrafish leads to distended ear tissue. The ES contains a pressure relief valve comprised of partially separated apical junctions and dynamic overlapping basal lamellae. This lmx1-dependent pressure relief valve is required to maintain fluid homeostasis in the inner ear and other fluid-filled cavities. Understanding the mechanisms by which organs use water-filled cavities to compartmentalize biochemical and biophysical environments is a fundamental problem.
Acinetobacter baumannii bacteria, which cause nosocomial infections with high mortality rates, have become a major concern due to their rapid evolution of antibiotic resistance. A study has shown that Acinetobacter baylyi engages in bacterial predation, which leads to extremely high rates of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within microbial communities that likely fuels MDR super-bugs. The researchers develop a model and microfluidic device to observe and quantify the population dynamics of HGT in real-time. They find that T6SS-mediated contact-dependent cell killing by Acinetobacter promotes DNA release from lysed prey cells, which allows the rapid uptake of DNA from a broad array of bacteria, leading to the acquisition of antibiotic resistance in Acinetobacter. The authors conclude that killing-enhanced HGT may play a critical role in the emergence of MDR super-bugs and suggest their model may help predict and combat HGT of antibiotic resistance.
The study analyses Dystrophin binding dynamics for the first time, which is important as perturbation of Dystrophin causes muscular dystrophy. The study focuses on human Dystrophin in zebrafish embryos, which are suitable for this particular aim. The study reveals two membrane-bound Dystrophin populations with differing bound lifetimes: a stable, tightly bound pool, and a dynamic bound pool with high turnover rate that exchanges with the cytoplasmic pool. The study confirms that there is value in this methodology for in vivo analysis of protein dynamics. The study highlights that the presence of a cytoplasmic pool of Dystrophin has to be taken into account to confidently analyse Dystrophin binding dynamics.
The article discusses the role of Mer2 as a key component of the DNA double-strand break (DSB) machinery during meiotic recombination. The article explains that Mer2 is crucial to the temporal control of Spo11-dependent DSB formation and connects the Spo11 machinery directly to Spp1-mediated nucleosome interactions. Through in vitro biochemical reconstitution with yeast genetics, the authors investigate several distinct protein-protein interactions of Mer2, including its interaction with Spp1, nucleosomes, proteins of the meiotic axis, and additional members of the DSB machinery. The authors confirm that the majority of the Spp1 binding interface is contained within the core of Mer2 and that the tetramerization region of Mer2 is also the principal Spp1 binding region. Additionally, they show that the Mer2 tetramer binds two copies of Spp1, establishing a complex in a 4:2 stoichiometry, and aids in the recognition of modified nucleosome tails by Spp1. Finally, the authors use cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry to study the structural organization of Mer2-Spp1 further and compare the cross-linking pattern observed previously for Mer2 alone.
This document discusses the formation of beige adipocytes, which consume glucose and fatty acids to produce heat, in white adipose tissues (WAT) through triggers such as cold temperatures and β3-adrenergic receptor (Adrb3) agonists. The study reveals that cold-induced beige adipocyte formation requires Adrb1 activation, while Adrb3 activation stimulates mature white adipocytes to convert into beige adipocytes. The study also explores the origins of beige adipocytes, discussing the traditional notion that white adipocytes can transdifferentiate into beige adipocytes and recent studies that indicate cold-induced beige adipocytes are generated from blood vessel-derived progenitors within WAT. The document also details fate mapping studies that show which cells are involved in eliciting Adrb3-induced beige adipocytes, and their implications for advancing clinical utility by enhancing beige adipocyte formation and function to reduce body fat percentage, reduce blood sugar, and increase metabolic rate.
Researchers have identified O-glycosylation as a new post-translational modification (PTM) on mouse osteocalcin (OCN), a hormone secreted by osteoblasts that regulates glucose metabolism, muscle adaptation, and male fertility. This modification occurs on a single serine residue (S8) and increases OCN half-life in plasma both ex vivo and in vivo. However, the same modification is not present in the corresponding human OCN (hOCN), although a single mutation (Y12S) increases hOCN half-life in plasma compared to the wild-type. The study also reveals that OCN PTMs differ between mice and humans, which may explain why serum concentrations of OCN are higher in mice than in humans. Protein O-glycosylation is known to increase the stability of some peptide hormones in the circulation by preventing proteolytic degradation, and the researchers suggest that this mechanism may be responsible for the increased half-life observed in OCN.
This study used super-resolution microscopy to examine the nanometric-scale organization of viroplasms (VPs) formed during rotavirus infection. The structure of VPs was found to consist of five concentric layers of viral proteins arranged around non-structural protein NSP5 at the center. The study identified the spatial distribution of seven viral proteins within and around VPs and proposed a model that describes their relative spatial distribution. The results validate the circularity of the VP shape and provide key methodologies for future investigations.
Researchers have discovered that giant lipid vesicles made of phase separating lipid mixtures, which are closed compartments consisting of semi-permeable shells that isolate femto- to pico-liter quantities of aqueous core from the surrounding bulk, exhibit damped oscillations in phase behavior in hypertonic media. This occurs due to a sequence of mechanochemical events, leading to osmotic relaxation and the appearance of microscopic domains that are synchronized with swell-burst lytic cycles. The process is driven by changes in osmotic pressure, membrane tension, and poration. This emergent behavior allows synthetic vesicles to sense and regulate their micro-environment. The oscillations are reproducible for various lipid compositions within the phase coexistence window, neutral osmolytes, GUV sizes, and initially imposed strengths of osmotic gradients.
Activating mutations in FLT3 are a poor prognosis for AML patients. FLT3 inhibitors can achieve complete remissions but often suffer from acquired resistance and myelosuppression. A novel chemical strategy for selective FLT3 inhibition has been developed while avoiding KIT inhibition. Kinase inhibitors are limited by the ability to target multiple wild-type kinases in normal tissues, which limits the efficacy of targeting mutant kinases in tumor tissues. By understanding the synthetic lethal effects on normal cells and developing selective inhibitors that avoid even a small number of ‘off-target’ kinases, clinical agents with an improved therapeutic index can be developed. A novel C7-substituted staurosporine analog, Star 27, has been developed with weak but selective inhibition of FLT3 over the anti-target KIT with improved potency for FLT3 with emerging mutations. The C7 substituent points towards the gatekeeper residue of the kinase, and FLT3 and KIT possess Phe and Thr gatekeepers, respectively. Star 27 has improved selectivity with a KIT/FLT3 ratio of >1700 and a CSF1R/FLT3 ratio of >16,500.
A study has found that the yellow gene in Drosophila melanogaster affects male mating success through its effects on pigmentation of male-specific leg structures called sex combs. Loss of yellow expression in these modified bristles reduces their melanization, which changes their structure and causes difficulty grasping females prior to copulation. Previous work had suggested that yellow influenced mating behavior through effects on wing extension, song, and/or courtship vigor, as well as effects on the nervous system more generally, but this study rules out those explanations. The study also found that yellow expression in non-neuronal dsx-expressing cells is required for normal male mating behavior, and screening of dsx-enhancer GAL4 lines identified 42D04-GAL4 as driving expression in cells requiring yellow expression for normal male mating behavior.
Researchers have used CRISPR/Cas9 engineering to identify two protein complexes that prevent a transcription factor from being expressed in human skeletal muscle cells. Writing in the journal eLife, the team from the University of Massachusetts Medical School identified the Nucleosome Remodeling Deacetylase (NuRD) and Chromatin Assembly Factor 1 (CAF-1) complexes as the key mediators of DUX4 chromatin repression. The work could offer a route to finding treatments for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
Researchers have used the adult germline of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to establish that quiescence of mitotically-dividing cells can maintain stem cells, independent of the signalling pathway usually required. Stem cells in adult tissues were once thought to be mostly quiescent, but more recently it has become clear that different types of adult stem cells cycle in response to the needs of the tissue. The research shows that in C. elegans adults, germ cells stop dividing and become quiescent in the absence of food, thereby providing optimal conditions to investigate the control of stem cell maintenance under these conditions.
The basal ganglia is a collection of interconnected subcortical regions of the vertebrate brain. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia can produce severe deficits in the timing, initiation, and vigor of movement. The basal ganglia circuit can be described as an extended loop that begins with projections from deep layer cortical neurons and ultimately returns to the cortex via projections from the basal ganglia to the ventral thalamus. The primary source of output from the sensorimotor basal ganglia in rodents is the substantia nigra (SN) pars reticulata (SNr), which is a microcircuit lacking interneurons. In this study, feedback via axon collaterals of substantia nigra projection neurons control the gain of the basal ganglia output. Through a combination of physiology, optogenetics, anatomy, and circuit mapping, the study elaborates a general circuit mechanism for gain control. The data suggest that diverse tonic firing rates, weak unitary connections, and a spatially diffuse collateral circuit with distinct topography and kinetics from feedforward input is sufficient to implement divisive feedback inhibition. The importance of feedback for engineered systems implies that the intranigral microcircuit, despite its absence from canonical models, could be essential to basal ganglia function.
Researchers have developed an ultrasound protocol that can modulate brain activation in macaques for up to an hour after stimulation. The transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS) technique involves using low intensity pulsed ultrasound to focus on specific brain regions, inducing neuromodulation without causing structural damage. The researchers used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the impact of TUS on brain activity, and found that TUS induced spatially specific changes to the connectivity profile of stimulated regions, selectively interacting more strongly with closely connected regions while decreasing coupling with more distant areas. The effects of TUS were temporary but sustained, lasting up to 2 hours, and not associated with microstructural changes. The study highlights the potential of TUS as a non-invasive brain stimulation technique for research and therapeutic interventions.
The study investigates how microtubule motors organize microtubules in Drosophila neurons. The researchers discovered that at the initial stages of axon outgrowth, kinesin-1 drives outgrowth by sliding antiparallel microtubules from the “minus end out”. Later, the microtubule orientation in the axon switches to uniform polarity with “plus-end-out,” and dynein knockdown prevents this rearrangement. Microtubule organization requires recruitment of dynein to the actin cortex. In addition, kinesin-1 also slides microtubules against each other, and this sliding generates the forces that drive outgrowth at the initial stages of neurite outgrowth and axon regeneration.
SpoIIIE is a protein that plays a pivotal role in chromosome translocation and membrane fission during bacterial sporulation. This study investigated the architecture and function of the SpoIIIE DNA translocation complex in vivo. The study found that SpoIIIE assembles a coaxially paired channel for each chromosome arm, with at least one hexamer in each cell, to maintain membrane fission during DNA translocation. The study also found that SpoIIIE can operate as a bi-directional motor that exports DNA from a given cell compartment. The study used a cell-specific protein degradation system to investigate the organization of the SpoIIIE DNA translocation complex in living cells. The results suggest that the translocation complex is present in both the mother cell and forespore. The study provides a deeper understanding of the mechanism of DNA translocation and membrane fission during bacterial sporulation.
This article explores the mechanism behind anisotropic growth in the hypocotyls of young seedlings. Anisotropic growth is the controlled growth of principal dimensions of a cell; in the case of a hypocotyl, length increases relative to width to allow it to quickly penetrate the soil. The article describes the role of different cell wall components, including cellulose and pectin, in anisotropic growth, and presents experimental evidence of their contributions. The article also discusses the role of microtubule orientation in growth, finding that MTs are weakly transverse in outer epidermal faces at germination, but more strongly transverse in inner cortical tissues at 24HPG. The authors conclude that an interdisciplinary approach is necessary for an accurate understanding of anisotropic growth.
Scientists have developed a new system that allows for the study of human T-cells interacting with dendritic cells in a tissue-like 3D culture. This system enables real-time single-cell manipulations, tracking of interactions, and functional responses complemented by population-based measurements of cytokines, activation status, and proliferation. By optimising procedures to engineer primary human immune cells using mRNA electroporation, the researchers achieved high efficiency TCR expression and maintenance of T-cell motility, activation dynamics, and viability. The system allows for the study of T-cell/DC interactions as a function of antigen affinity and the interrogation of complex dynamics of a trinary cellular system where both CD4 and CD8 T-cells can interact with similar or different APCs. The system also enables the study of immunological phenomena such as CD4 T-cells' help to CD8 T-cells through enhanced maturation of DCs and the effect of PD-1 checkpoint blockades.
The role of pain in the development of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is not fully understood. A study using mice with autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a model for MS, has shown that pain induces a relapse in the disease. This is due to pain inducing a neural signal that activates a sensory-sympathetic signal followed by an accumulation of immune cells at specific vessels in the spinal cord. This leads to a relapse in the disease. The study suggests that this pain-mediated neural signal could be a potential therapeutic target for relapse in chronic inflammatory diseases like MS.
The study investigates whether differences in surface structures of bacterial biofilms can lead to cell sorting and changes in the architecture of biofilms. The researchers used the type IV pilus of Neisseria gonorrhoeae to test the hypothesis that the physical interactions between cells govern the morphology of mixed bacterial cell clusters. They genetically engineered strains with different densities of pili and their abilities to generate force and found that cells sorted towards the colony boundary depending on pilus density and pilus-breakage force. The observed morphotypes were in remarkable agreement with the differential strength of adhesion hypothesis. The breakage force between gonococci is fine-tuned by post-translational modification of pilin. Gonococci were inoculated onto agar plates at a density low enough to ensure microcolonies arising from individual bacteria, and time-lapse microscopy was used to follow the dynamics of their off-spring. The research developed tools for directly visualizing the spatio-temporal dynamics of segregation between different strains.
The study explores the relationship between T cell receptor (TCR) engagement with antigens and downstream signals, specifically the quantitative translation of TCR engagement into gene expression programs essential for T cell function. The study demonstrates that T cells respond to ligands of varying dose and affinity by modulating both the frequency of responder cells and the level of activation of responder cells at a single-cell level. The analog activation markers are proportional to the strength of TCR signaling when comparing across doses and affinities. The study shows that gene expression reflects TCR signal strength and relies on a pre-established enhancer landscape and quantitative acetylation at AP-1 binding sites. The graded expression of activation genes is dependent on ERK pathway activation, suggesting that an ERK-AP-1 axis plays an important role in translating TCR signal strength into proportional (analog) activation of enhancers and genes essential for T cell function. The study provides a tool for ranking arbitrary CD4+ T cell populations by activation score. The results suggest that the degree of ERK activation translates the analog TCR signal resulting from varying the dose and affinity of TCR engagement into downstream gene expression programs.
The rice seedling blight fungus Rhizopus microsporus and its endosymbiont Burkholderia rhizoxinica form a specific alliance to produce the toxin rhizoxin. How the bacteria invade the fungal cells has been unknown. Genome mining and functional analyses showed that a type 2 secretion system (T2SS) of the bacterial endosymbiont is required for the formation of the endosymbiosis. Comparative proteome analyses revealed that the T2SS releases chitinolytic enzymes, which are essential for the bacteria to enter the hyphae. The results provide insight into the fungal cell wall penetration and symbiosis formation, which have implications for the environment, agriculture, and biotechnology.
The Chromosome Region of Maintenance 1 (CRM1) protein helps to export proteins from the nucleus by recognizing nuclear export signals (NESs) in the proteins. The structure of the NES-bound CRM1 groove is known, but it is not clear how some NES sequences, especially those of class 3, can bind to CRM1 given their incompatible structures. Crystal structures of CRM1 bound to two different class 3 NESs revealed that they bind to the CRM1 groove in the opposite orientation compared to other NESs studied so far. This orientation binding was dependent on specific sequence and structural determinants in the NES. The findings expand the consensus pattern for NESs and enable the identification of new NESs. CRM1 is a promising cancer drug target and a small molecule inhibitor of CRM1, named Selinexor, is currently in more than 40 clinical trials for a variety of cancers.
Researchers have used a combination of single-cell RNA-sequencing and in vivo models to define the developmental relationships between medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), which play a critical role in central immune tolerance by mediating negative selection of autoreactive T cells. The study identified a non-stem transit-amplifying population of cycling mTECs that precedes Aire expression, and proposed a branching model of mTEC development whereby a heterogeneous pool of transit-amplifying cells gives rise to Aire- and Ccl21a-expressing mTEC subsets. The study also examined the kinetics of tissue-specific antigen (TSA) expression in relation to Aire and identified a transit-amplifying population of mTECs that precedes TSA expression, implying that Aire expression must be established before TSA expression can occur.
Researchers have developed a new method using high-speed light sheet microscopy to map calcium flows in embryos of the zebrafish, a key model organism. The data offers new insights into how cardiac cells communicate with each other during embryonic development. Specifically, by simultaneously studying both cell-level and organ-level behaviours, researchers have been able to closely watch as the developing heart redistributes functions across different regions. The technology could be of particular use in discovering how abnormalities arise in heart development.
The article discusses the regulation of dynein, a motor protein involved in spindle positioning during cell division in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The cortical dynein generates pulling forces by two mechanisms: microtubule end capture-shrinkage and lateral microtubule sliding. The article proposes that changes in Num1 localization, a dynein attachment molecule, alter dynein function in cells lacking ER tether proteins Scs2/Scs22, resulting in the loss of dynein-dependent MT sliding. The loss of MT sliding is compensated in the absence of Scs2/Scs22 by spindle positioning via the MT end capture-shrinkage mechanism, where dynein anchorage is to an ER and mitochondria-independent population of Num1, dynein motor activity, and the CAP-Gly domain of dynactin Nip100/p150Glued subunit. The article suggests that the spatial distribution of Num1 is crucial for regulating dynein pulling force.
Fabry disease (FD) is a life-threatening genetic disorder caused by α-galactosidase A (α-GAL) deficiency, resulting in the accumulation of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) in the body. Small fiber pathology and pain are major symptoms of FD, and the mechanisms behind this are poorly understood. This study investigated the role of Gb3 accumulation in neuronal damage and sensory impairment in FD using α-GAL deficient mice. The results suggest that intracellular Gb3 deposits interfere with ion channel expression and function and neuronal integrity, leading to sensory disturbance, pain, and skin denervation. The study provides comprehensive evidence for a potential mechanism underlying FD symptoms and could lead to the development of new treatments for the disease.
Meiotic chromosomes are highly compacted yet remain transcriptionally active. The axial element is the protein structure that compacts meiotic chromosomes and promotes recombination and fertility. The assembly of the axial element was investigated in order to understand how chromosome folding accommodates transcription. The major determinant of axis attachment sites is the proteinaceous cohesin complex, which is widely present at sites of convergent transcription providing dispersed points for axis attachment and thus chromosome compaction. Two independent modulating mechanisms control the binding and the chromosome-size-biased enrichment of axis proteins. Red1 and Hop1 axis proteins show a distinctive 2-peak pattern of accumulation between convergently transcribed genes. Red1 enrichment occurs significantly biased toward the ends of open reading frames (ORFs), while showing strong enrichment within the intergenic regions of convergent gene pairs, a pattern previously described for cohesin-associated sites. DSB hotspots were largely excluded from sites of axis protein binding. The number of axis sites on individual chromosomes was highly correlated with the number of Spo11 cleavage events.
New research has identified a receptor in the sensory neurons that causes itching when bilirubin builds up in the blood, commonly causing jaundice. Bilirubin is also associated with itch often experienced by patients with hepatobiliary disorders such as cholestasis, which is characterised by impaired bile flow. The research found that bilirubin binds and activates two MRGPRs, a family of G-protein coupled receptors expressed in primary sensory neurons that excite peripheral itch sensory neurons and elicit itching. The findings suggest targeting MRGPRs may help alleviate jaundice-associated itch.
Exercise has systemic effects that can improve outcomes for cancer patients. In mice, exercise-induced reduction in tumor growth is dependent on CD8+ T cells, and metabolites produced in skeletal muscle and excreted into plasma during exertion enhance the effector profile of CD8+ T cells. Exercise also reduces tumor growth in a CD8+ T cell-dependent manner. Exercise affects a wide range of metabolic pathways and alters the metabolic environment of lymphoid organs. Lactate produced during exercise does not significantly alter circulating plasma pH levels, and TCA metabolites enhance the loss of CD62L in response to activation. Sodium L-lactate induces a dose-dependent increase in inducible T-cell costimulator ( iCOS ) and Granzyme B ( GzmB ) expression at day 3 of culture.
The ability to estimate numerical quantities, or "number sense," is thought to be a crucial substrate for mathematical skills. However, it is debated whether this ability relies on an independent neuronal processing mechanism or is judged indirectly based on other quantitative features. This study used high-resolution fMRI to investigate the neural processing of numerosity in adult human volunteers. The results suggest that numerosity is separable from other quantitative features and is represented by a sensory extraction mechanism already at early visual stages. Additionally, later regions of the dorsal visual stream are most important for explicit manipulation of numerical quantity. Overall, this study provides insight into the neural mechanisms underlying the ability to estimate numerical quantities in humans.
The Mullerian ducts are an essential part of the female reproductive tract that regresses in male fetuses due to a response to MIS, which is driven by subluminal mesenchymal cells expressing Misr2. In females, these Misr2+ cells are retained, but their role in the development of the uterus is unclear. The study found that subliminal Misr2+ cells persist postnatally in rodents, but recede by week 37 of gestation in humans. Exposure to MIS during the first six days of life can inhibit specification of the stroma, dysregulates paracrine signals necessary for uterine development, leading to apoptosis of Misr2+ cells, uterine hypoplasia, and complete infertility in adult females. The study characterizes persistent Misr2+ subluminal mesenchymal cells beyond the embryonic period of sexual differentiation, documents their retained sensitivity to MIS neonatally, and characterizes their crucial role in the development of the endometrial stroma.
T-box riboswitches are RNA elements that regulate the expression of proteins involved in amino acid biosynthesis and transport. They bind to specific tRNAs and sense their aminoacylation state. Using single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET), it has been observed that tRNA binds to the riboswitch in two steps, first anticodon recognition followed by sensing of the 3’ end. This two-step binding process is driven by specific T-box structural elements, which are highly conserved among T-box riboswitches. The results suggest that this binding mechanism is kinetically beneficial for efficient, co-transcriptional recognition of the cognate tRNA ligand.
Protein kinases are a major drug target due to their role in cellular processes and involvement in various types of cancer. However, developing specific kinase inhibitors is challenging due to the similarity of their active sites. The observation of distinct structural states of the DFG loop has put the concept of conformational selection for the DFG-state at the center of kinase drug discovery. Recent research suggests that drug selectivity is rooted in conformational changes after drug binding, and this mechanism is a more general principle for drug efficacy and selectivity. The study investigates the binding of several approved drugs to Ser/Thr-kinase Aurora A using a combination of biophysical techniques and proposes a universal drug-binding mechanism that rationalizes selectivity, affinity, and on-target residence time for kinase inhibitors. Differential drug affinity is not rooted in the DFG-conformation but instead in the dynamic personality of the kinase that is manifested in conformational changes after drug binding. The study provides a general mechanistic view that can be applied to inhibitor design of targets outside the kinome.
During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, a division septum is formed near a randomly chosen pole creating two unequally sized daughter cells with dissimilar expressions of genes. The small cell, forespore, will become the spore, while the larger cell, mother cell, nurtures the developing spore. The earliest acting regulatory protein in this process is transcription factor σF which is activated by anti-anti-sigma factor SpoIIAA. Activation of SpoIIAA-P to SpoIIAA is done by SpoIIE, a protein phosphatase. The study describes how SpoIIE links polar septation to cell-specific activation of σF by compartmentalizing SpoIIE in the small cell by transfer from the polar septum to the adjacent cell pole, where it is protected from proteolysis and activated. Polar recognition, protection from proteolysis, and stimulation of phosphatase activity are linked to SpoIIE’s oligomerization. SpoIIE is unstable and degraded dependent on the AAA+ protease FtsH – which is present near SpoIIE in the genome.
The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is responsible for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), a genetic predisposition to colorectal cancer, and is found in the majority of sporadic colonic tumors. A new study has investigated the mechanistic relationship between the mutational status of the APC gene and mitochondrial pyruvate carrier 1 (MPC1), which affects pyruvate metabolism, and - through experiments on zebra fish - found that loss of MPC1 was responsible for a range of phenotypes associated with impaired APC function, including failed intestinal differentiation. The findings suggest that changes in metabolic profile can drive cell fate and differentiation decisions.
This study characterizes the defecation behavior of Drosophila larvae and identifies two groups of motor neurons that innervate the hindgut and anal sphincter respectively, and are responsible for the defecation cycles. The defecation behavior requires a single mechanosensitive sensory neuron that relies on the TRP channel NOMPC for mechanotransduction. This study also shows that malfunction of defecation can lead to constipation and other diseases, and the abnormal development of neural circuits governing defecation may underlie birth defects such as Hirschsprung's disease. The study establishes Drosophila larvae as a model system to study defecation behavior and investigates the neural basis for the gut movements.
Researchers have discovered a group of neurons in mice that play a crucial role in reducing appetite and body weight. The subset of neurons contain cholecystokinin (CCKNTS) and are activated by nutritional state. When these neurons are activated, they reduce appetite and body weight. The CCKNTS neurons are located in the Nucleus of the Solitary Tract, a key gateway for meal-related signals entering the brain, and provide distinctive innervation of the Paraventricular Nucleus of the Hypothalamus, which regulates energy balance. The satiation function of CCKNTS neurons is mediated by a CCKNTS to PVH pathway that encodes positive valence. The study also reveals a sufficient and discrete NTS to hypothalamus circuit controlling appetite.
The mechanisms by which the brain creates a painful experience are still not fully understood. Traditional theories suggest that cortical regions reflect stimulus intensity or additive effects of intensity and expectations. However, predictive coding theories suggest that perception is shaped by the integration of beliefs about the world with mismatches from sensory input. In a study using functional magnetic resonance imaging during a probabilistic heat pain paradigm, the researchers found that skin conductance, pupil dilation, and anterior insula responses to cued pain stimuli followed the response patterns hypothesized by the predictive coding model, whereas posterior insula encoded stimulus intensity. This dissociation offers a novel interpretation of aberrant pain processing as disturbances in the weighting of predictions and prediction errors. The study also supports the idea that pain processing is based on predictive coding principles, which could help explain expectation-related effects, including placebo effects.
The organization and function of non-centrosomal microtubule (MT) arrays in cells is poorly understood. However, in the Drosophila oocyte, MTs are important for directing mRNA localization to establish the anterior-posterior body axis. A theoretical model for the non-centrosomal MT cytoskeleton in Drosophila oocytes has been developed that shows a simple gradient of cortical MT nucleation is sufficient to reproduce the observed MT distribution, cytoplasmic flow patterns and localisation of mRNAs. The model reveals an organisation of the MT cytoskeleton that is more ordered than previously understood and highlights the key role of differential cortical MT nucleation or anchoring at the cortex. The MT cytoskeleton acts by providing a localised directionality to guide transport with a more ordered meshwork rather than a random one, which explains many features of MT network formation and mRNA localisation.
The document proposes a hypothesis that stability, complexity, and diversity in living forms are emergent properties in populations of proliferating polarized cells. The theory is supported using a theoretical approach, which suggests experimentally testable predictions pointing to the strength of polar adhesion, restricted directions of cell polarities, and the rate of cell proliferation to be major determinants of morphological diversity and stability. The document also outlines simulations that support the idea that polar adhesion enables stable and robust macroscopic shapes. In addition, the document explores how proliferation can lead to folded structures through simulations and quantifies the final folded structures in terms of their local minima. Finally, the document describes how inducing PCP in a spherical lumen leads to two significant events, independent of initial orientation: PCP becomes globally ordered and cells start intercalating along the axis perpendicular to PCP orientation.
The fusion pore is the initial connection between secretory granules and the extracellular space, and its behavior during exocytosis regulates the release of hormones and small transmitter molecules. Epac2 controls fusion pore behavior, restricting the expansion of the pore and therefore the release of hormones during insulin granule exocytosis. Activation of Epac2 decreases insulin release and increases the release of small transmitter molecules such as ATP. Antidiabetic drugs that activate this pathway paradoxically restrict hormone release. Epac2 overexpression impedes pore expansion, whereas inactivation of Epac2 abolishes pore expansion. Currently, Epac2/cAMP is the only pathway known to control fusion pore expansion, and thus contribute to the balance of hormone and transmitter release.
The article discusses the discovery of the earliest known mimetic relationship between a lacewing moth and a lichen model, which predates modern lichen-insect associations by 165 million years. The study reveals that the mid-Mesozoic era marked the establishment of the lichen-insect mimesis system, which provided lacewings with highly honed survival strategies. The authors provide evidence of structural similarities and detailed measurements of the mimic's wing and the model's thallus to corroborate the mimetic relationship. The article also discusses other cases of insect mimicry, including those that involve camouflaged larvae of chrysopid and myrmeleontoid neuropterans in amber, which evolved distinctive debris-carrying behaviors to enhance their predatory effectiveness. The article suggests that the Jurassic Lichenipolystoechotes may have gained a survival advantage from mimicking a lichen model, and the high-contrast lichen-like markings of Lichenipolystoechotes could likely bring double protections to the insects, i.e., background mimicry and disruptive coloration. Furthermore, the article highlights the open question about any possible benefits that the lichen model, Daohugouthallus ciliiferus, might have received from its mimetic association with Lichenipolystoechotes.
The study investigates the role of Fatty Acid Oxidation (FAO) in the differentiation of blood cell progenitors in Drosophila larval hematopoietic organ, lymph gland. The researchers show that FAO is essential for the differentiation of blood cell progenitors, and in its absence, the progenitors are unable to differentiate and exhibit altered histone acetylation. The CPT1/whd, the rate-limiting enzyme of FAO, is transcriptionally regulated by Jun-Kinase (JNK), which has been previously implicated in progenitor differentiation. The study provides evidence of how the cellular signaling machinery integrates with the metabolic cue to facilitate the differentiation program. The findings indicate a previously unknown link that connects cellular signaling and metabolic circuitry essential for differentiation of blood progenitors.
The ability of CD4+ T-cell (a type of immune cell) to recognize and respond to self and foreign antigens changes over time and remains largely unexplored. This study finds that although old mice have fewer CD4+ T-cells compared to younger adults, the CD4+ T-cells that remain have a higher affinity for self-antigens and are more capable of binding foreign-antigens. However, the clonal representation of the CD4+ T-cell compartment increases with age. The study also reports that the steady-state T-cell receptor engagement was higher in old mice, as indicated by higher CD5 expression. The study concludes that age-related changes can lead to a diminishing diversity of the T-cell receptor, making it insufficient to mount sufficient response or protection against new infections, which can explain why old individuals have increased susceptibility to infections and decreased responsiveness to vaccines.
Rett syndrome is a neurological disorder caused by loss of function of the X-linked gene encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). Conversely, duplication or triplication of Xq28 causes another neurological disorder called MECP2 duplication syndrome, which has some overlapping features with Rett syndrome. To determine which aspects of MeCP2 cause toxicity in the duplication syndrome, researchers created mouse models expressing endogenous Mecp2 with a Rett-causing mutation in either the methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) or the transcriptional repression domain (TRD). They found that both the MBD and TRD are required for doubling MeCP2 to be toxic, and that mutations in these domains are harmless when expressed with endogenous Mecp2. Mutating the TRD is more detrimental than deleting the entire C-terminus, indicating a dominant-negative effect on MeCP2 function.
The article discusses the role of epistasis in protein evolution and presents an experiment focusing on the nucleoprotein of human H3N2 influenza A virus. The experiment aims to test Maynard Smith's analogy comparing protein evolution to the game where one word is converted into another one letter at a time, with the constraint that all intermediates are words. The experiment reconstructs the evolutionary trajectory of influenza nucleoprotein and introduces each mutation individually into the parent to study the role of epistasis. It is found that several mutations were deleterious to the parent but became fixed during evolution. The experiment reveals that epistasis constrains both the sequence evolution and ongoing adaptation of NP, with stabilizing mutations permitting otherwise inaccessible destabilizing mutations which are sometimes of adaptive value. The article suggests that this approach can be used to understand epistasis in other proteins and identify adaptive mutations.
Scientists have discovered a new signaling pathway in Geobacter sulfurreducens that employs a GGDEF enzyme with unique activity. The enzyme, GacA, specifically regulates cyclic GMP-AMP levels in vivo, which stimulates gene expression associated with metal reduction. This is a distinct function from the majority of homologs associated with bacterial cyclic di-GMP signaling. The pathway emerged from components of cdiG signaling to regulate a distinct surface-associated lifestyle. The study provides evidence that specific signaling can result from a promiscuous enzyme. The new pathway is useful for bioremediation of metal-rich sites and anaerobic oxidation of petroleum-based groundwater pollutants.
The article discusses the cytoneme transport model, which proposes that specialized filopodia extend between cells to ensure appropriate signaling thresholds are achieved. The article focuses on how Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) morphogen is transported and deployed from cytonemes, how quickly a receptor-dependent signal is initiated, and whether these processes are conserved across phyla. The study found that the actin motor Myosin 10 promotes vesicular transport of SHH morphogen in mouse cell cytonemes and that a novel Dispatched (DISP)-BOC/CDON co-receptor complex functions in ligand-producing cells to promote cytoneme occurrence and facilitate ligand delivery for signal activation. The study also revealed that cytoneme-mediated deposition of SHH onto receiving cells induces a rapid, receptor-dependent signal response that occurs within seconds of ligand delivery. The study suggests that SHH-producing cells may tune cytoneme occurrence rates proportional to morphogen expression levels. The study also found that other developmental signaling molecules can modulate the activity of the specialized filopodia in NIH3T3 cells. Finally, the study developed a contact-mediated activation assay to monitor Ca2+ flux by co-culturing R-GECO-expressing Ca2+ reporter cells with NIH3T3 cells expressing palmitoylated and cholesterol-modified SHH-GFP or GFP control.
The size of eukaryotic genomes has increased disproportionately to nuclear volume over evolutionary timescales, requiring a greater degree of chromatin compaction which has been enabled by several different mechanisms. However, whether histones themselves have evolved to regulate chromatin compaction has not been clear. In this study, analysis of histone sequences from 160 eukaryotes revealed that histone H2A has systematically acquired arginines in its N-terminus as genomes expanded. Insertion of arginines into H2A of a small-genome organism increased chromatin compaction, while their absence was shown to markedly decrease compaction in cells with large genomes. This effect was replicated in vitro with nucleosomal arrays using unmodified histones, indicating that the H2A N-terminus directly modulates the chromatin fibre, likely through intra- and inter-nucleosomal arginine–DNA contacts, to enable tighter nucleosomal packing. These findings may explain the frequent mutations of the H2A N-terminus in cancer.
The article discusses the role of Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport III (ESCRT-III) proteins in cellular membrane scission processes, including their recruitment by HIV-1 for the release of the virus from the host cell plasma membrane. The study imaged single assembling viral-like particles of HIV-1 and found that ESCRT-IIIs and the ATPase VPS4 arrive after most of the virion membrane is bent, linger for tens of seconds, and depart before scission. The article suggests that ESCRT-IIIs are recruited by a combination of membrane curvature and the late domains of the HIV-1 Gag protein, and they may pull the neck into a narrower form but must leave to allow scission. The study also examined the timing of ESCRT recruitment relative to membrane bending and scission and found that ESCRT-III CHMP4B, CHMP2A, CHMP2B, and VPS4A leave the membrane prior to scission. The specific lipid composition in the neck is not known, but the study suggests that ESCRTs at the neck may bias the composition toward more negatively charged lipids, and scission is more likely when the net negative charge on phospholipids in the viral neck is reduced by protonation. The study also observed multiple rounds of ESCRT-III/VPS4 recruitment, with scission only occurring after the final wave of recruitment of ESCRT-III/VPS4.
Researchers have discovered that cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) can coordinate their migration, similar to the swarming behaviour observed in neutrophils, and can induce a localised mass response by amplifying the direct recruitment of additional T cells independently of other leukocytes. The CTLs engage cognate targets and accelerate the recruitment of distant T cells through long-range homotypic signalling partially mediated by the diffusion of chemokines CCL3 and CCL4. Newly arriving CTLs augment the chemotactic signal, leading to further mass recruitment. These findings provide insights into how CTL populations amplify directed recruitment to an effector site independently of other leukocytes. The study also identified CCL3 and CCL4 as the key molecules responsible for this homotypic signalling.
The article discusses the science of immunoglobulins (Ig), their function in the body, and their role in immunity to viruses. Specifically, the study investigates the similarities and differences between the VLRB antibodies found in lampreys and the Ig antibodies found in mammals, specifically in their responses to influenza A virus (IAV). The study found that the VLRB and Ig responses to IAV are extremely similar, focusing on recognition of the major antigenic sites in the HA globular head domain. The study suggests that better understanding the rules of immunogenicity could inform efforts to design better vaccines.
The molecular control of larval recruitment, the transition of pelagic larvae to reef-associated juveniles critical to the resilience of marine fish populations, is largely unknown. In this study, thyroid hormones (TH) and their receptors (TR) were investigated as the potential coordinators of larval recruitment in the coral-reef fish species, Acanthurus triostegus. The study's findings showed that TH levels and TR expressions control metamorphosis during larval recruitment, which is sensitive to endocrine disruption. Chlorpyrifos, a pesticide commonly found in coral reefs, impairs A. triostegus TH levels, transformation, and grazing activity, which reduces their ability to control algae spread. This study provides a framework to understand how larval recruitment, essential to reef-ecosystems maintenance, is affected by anthropogenic stressors.
The Sox gene family encodes transcription factors involved in developmental processes, and the SoxB gene Dichaete is known to regulate segmentation in insects. This study investigated the role of Sox genes in arthropods by examining segmentation in the spider Parasteatoda tepidariorum. The study reveals that Sox21b-1, a closely related gene to Dichaete, acts as a gap gene during the formation of anterior segments and is also involved in the formation of the segmentation clock for the addition of opisthosomal segments. This finding sheds light on the regulation of segmentation in spiders and arthropods and provides insight into the evolution of these animals. Sox21b-1 is maternally contributed and is expressed during both anterior and posterior segmentation, as well as later during nervous system development. Knockdown of Sox21b-1 results in truncated embryos missing all opisthosomal segments and a failure of cumulus migration. Sox21b-1 is thus a key player in the transition from radial to axial symmetry and is involved in two different segmentation mechanisms in spiders.
Researchers have developed and recorded human-comparable EEG in macaque monkeys during visual stimulation with colored dynamic random dot patterns, and performed simultaneous microelectrode recordings from 6 areas of macaque cortex and human MEG to relate EEG and MEG to underlying circuit processes. Motion direction and color information were accessible in all signals, and tuning of the non-invasive signals was similar to V4 and IT, but not to dorsal and frontal areas. Monkey EEG can identify analogous properties of visual processing in signals spanning spatial scales from single units to MEG. The study establishes a proof of principle for using large-scale electrophysiology across species and measurement scales to link non-invasive recordings to circuit-level activity.
This study explores the relationship between cell shape and microtubule orientation in Arabidopsis pavement cells. The researchers use live imaging and modeling to show that microtubules align along the maximal tensile stress direction in the cell, which then leads to reinforcement of the cell wall parallel to the microtubules. The feedback loop between shape and microtubule orientation can be overridden by tissue level stresses, showing how competition between subcellular and supracellular cues control microtubule behavior. The researchers propose that cells can sense mechanical stresses at the subcellular scale, integrating cell shape-derived stresses and tissue shape-derived stresses through a single mechanism. They also show how mechanical stress can act as an instructive signal in microtubule organization at both subcellular and tissue scales.
A new study has found that perforin-2, a protein that plays a role in the immune system’s fight against bacterial and viral infections, is a target of a key group of enzymes known as cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases. Researchers from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Yeshiva University said the finding could help explain how bacteria promote their own survival by inhibiting innate immune responses. Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases are a major group of enzymes that regulate the levels of proteins in cells and are known to help control responses to viral infections. Understanding how bacteria use these enzymes to fight off immune attacks could help scientists develop new ways to target certain bacterial infections.
The document discusses meiotic drivers, which are selfish DNA sequences that manipulate gametogenesis to bias their own transmission into most or all offspring. The document focuses on the wtf4 gene, a meiotic driver in Schizosaccharomyces pombe that uses poison-antidote mechanism to selectively kill meiotic products (spores) that do not inherit wtf4. The study showed that the Wtf4 proteins can function outside of gametogenesis and in a distantly related species, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The Wtf4poison protein forms dispersed, toxic aggregates, and neutralization of the Wtf4poison requires both co-assembly with the Wtf4antidote and aggregate trafficking. The study adds to our understanding of how meiotic drivers such as wtf meiotic drivers work and their potential to be used in gene drive systems.
Autophagy is an important mechanism for the removal of misfolded proteins. Atg14L is a critical regulator of autophagy, but it is not clear how it is regulated. This study demonstrates that a ZBTB16-Cullin3-Roc1 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex controls the ubiquitination and degradation of Atg14L, which mediates the production of PtdIns3P to initiate the formation of autophagosomes. The study also shows that a wide range of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligands and agonists regulate the levels of Atg14L through ZBTB16. Activation of autophagy by pharmacological inhibition of GPCR reduces the accumulation of misfolded proteins and protects against behavior dysfunction in a mouse model of Huntington's disease. The study also identifies ZBTB16 as an important regulator of autophagy and Atg14L, and its CUL3-ROC1-ZBTB16 complex may promote the degradation of autophagic-specific Vps34 complexes through the proteasomal pathway.
The process of regulating organ growth is not well understood, particularly in the case of long bones, where growth plates drive elongation. Local signals have been found to modulate growth plate function in addition to intrinsic regulation. A genetic mouse model was created to study extrinsic long bone growth modulation, which revealed that mesenchyme cells surrounding postnatal growth plates play a role in modulating bone growth. This involves paracrine signals from the knee joint that impair growth plate signaling, including altered IGF1 production. The study suggests that extrinsic signals from the fat pad and articular cartilage modulate bone growth and could be used to correct growth defects in humans.
This document describes the methods and findings of a study focusing on the neural circuits of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The study presents a detailed atlas of cell types and circuits in the fly's brain, based on improved methods for preparing and analyzing large data sets. The researchers provide extensive information on the structure and connectivity of neurons in the central brain, as well as insights into questions such as electrical compartmentalization and the evolution of brain structure. The study emphasizes the use of FIB-SEM imaging to produce high-resolution and large-volume data, and highlights the challenges of dealing with issues such as gap junctions, glial cells, and internal structures of neurons. The researchers make their data public and provide procedures for linking their findings with genetic reagents.
Scientists have discovered how Trypanosoma brucei, the protozoan parasites responsible for sleeping sickness and other fatal infections, develop resistance to pentamidine and melarsoprol drugs. The study focused on the aquaporin AQP2 protein, which plays a role in transporting drugs into the parasites. Researchers found that mutations in AQP2 allow pentamidine to permeate its central pore, demonstrating the importance of the protein to drug uptake. The findings provide insight into the mechanisms of drug resistance in protozoan parasites, and have important implications for the development of new drugs.
The NuRD complex is a multi-protein transcriptional corepressor important for regulation of gene expression, chromatin organization, DNA damage repair and cell differentiation. It consists of six proteins, including HDAC1/2, MTA1/2/3, RBBP4/7, P66α/β, MBD2/3, and CHD3/4. The complex exhibits dual enzymatic functionality through its HDAC and ATPase domains. MTA1 serves as a scaffold protein for the assembly of the NuRD complex and mediates the recruitment of RBBP4/7. Two regions of MTA1, termed R1 and R2, are able to mediate interaction with RBBP4/7. The crystal structure of the MTA1-R1 domain bound to RBBP4 is presented, revealing an extensive interface that requires some structural rearrangement within RBBP4. Small angle X-ray scattering and single-particle negative-stain electron microscopy reveal the architecture of the core NuRD complex, in which RBBP4 proteins are tethered to the HDAC1 dimer by MTA1, forming an elongated zig-zag conformation. When in complex with MTA1, RBBP4 is able to interact with histone H3, but not histone H4, suggesting a mechanism for recruitment of the NuRD complex to chromatin.
The research sheds light on how initial actin filaments merge and evolve into contractile ventral stress fibers during migration. The contractile power of ventral stress fibers come from myosin II-derived tension, inhibiting the elongation of actin filaments at focal adhesions, which supports the force equilibrium. The use of Atomic Force Microscopy shows that the tension exerted by ventral stress fibers plays an influential role in the generation and maturation of focal adhesions, ultimately supporting the force balance.
Humans may have retained a vestigial pinna-orienting system that has lasted in the brain for about 25 million years despite not pointing their ears like dogs and cats do. The direction of auditory attention is reflected in sustained electrical activity of muscles within the vestigial auriculomotor (ear movement) system. The study found that activation of the ear muscles is directionally specific and occurs during both voluntary and reflexive attention. The study also confirmed the existence of directionally-appropriate responses of ear muscles to brief, novel sounds and voluntary sustained attention. The researchers ruled out the effect of eye and head movements on these findings.
Researchers have identified molecular cues that alert the immune system to danger from tumours, a key step in the recognition and elimination of tumour cells. It was found that natural killer (NK) cells become activated when a receptor called NKG2D is engaged by ligands upregulated in primary tumours and on cancer cell lines. Recognition of these ligands on early stage tumour cells is part of a defence mechanism, however, tumours can adapt to evade control so identifying the factors and pathways that regulate NKG2D ligands is crucial to devising immunotherapy.

Myxobacteria exchange outer membrane lipids and proteins upon contact, a process known as outer membrane exchange (OME). The TraA cell surface receptor selects OME partners based on a variable domain, but this polymorphism alone is not enough to precisely discriminate kin. Researchers have discovered a novel family of OME-delivered toxins called SitA lipoprotein toxins that promote kin discrimination of OME partners. These toxins are polymorphic and widespread in myxobacteria and are serially transferred between target cells, allowing the toxins to move cell-to-cell like an infectious agent. This system helps define strong identity barriers between strains and contributes to population structure, maintenance of cooperation, and strain diversification. Polymorphic toxins such as SitA toxins play an important role in the evolution and ecology of social microbes by promoting local relatedness and maintaining cooperation.
Nitrogen reduction is essential in the biological nitrogen cycle, catalysed by a two-component metalloenzyme named nitrogenase, which includes the active site FeMo-cofactor. An article in eLife describes an innovative approach to study the active site of the FeMo-cofactor. A molecular probe named selenium, a replacement of sulphur from a controlled sub-site, was used for crystallographic studies to identify the “rearrangements of the metal center during catalysis”. The study authenticated the movement of the selenium from its initial placement to its successor belt sulphur positions during substrate (acetylene) reduction. Restoring the substitutional bond enabled the vital study of the atomic catalytic mechanism of the FeMo-cofactor.
Researchers have identified a primary receptor called AtLYK5 that is responsible for recognizing chitin, a fungal microbe-associated molecular pattern. The AtLYK5 protein binds chitin with a much higher affinity than AtCERK1, previously thought to be the primary receptor, and interacts with AtCERK1 to induce plant immunity. Mutations in AtLYK5 reduce the chitin response, and the protein has been shown to be essential for a strong response to chitin elicitation. Along with AtCERK1 and AtLYK4, AtLYK5 is involved in chitin signaling. Plants have developed a strong immune system to defend against invading pathogens and detect Microbe-Associated Molecular Patterns (MAMPS) through leucine rich repeat receptor like protein kinase (LRR-RLK) family. Pathogens have also evolved to inhibit MAMPS through the secretion of effectors, and plants have evolved nucleotide-binding site leucine-rich repeat (NBS-LRR) proteins to restore immunity.
Researchers have designed self-assembling protein nanoparticles to present viral glycoprotein trimers from influenza, HIV, and respiratory syncytial virus in a multivalent manner, which can increase the elicitation of antigen-specific antibodies. They used a two-step design approach involving de novo designed trimers and secondary assembly components to generate tetrahedral, octahedral, and icosahedral nanoparticles which present 4, 8, or 20 copies of the viral glycoproteins in defined geometries. The synthetic genes for the designed trimers and homo-oligomers were expressed in E.coli and purified from lysates. The nanoparticles were structurally characterized using negative stain electron microscopy (NS-EM) and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM).
The article discusses the relationship between confidence and accuracy in decision making. It proposes a sequential sampling framework that explains the speed and accuracy of decisions and extends to the confidence that the decision rendered is likely to be correct. However, discrepancies between confidence and accuracy suggest that confidence might be supported by mechanisms dissociated from the decision process. The article shows that this discrepancy can arise naturally because of simple processing delays. The findings extend the sequential sampling framework to vacillation about confidence and invite caution in interpreting dissociations between confidence and accuracy. The interplay between confidence, accuracy, and reaction time is explained by a sequential sampling mechanism operating on a common evidence stream. On a small fraction of trials, subjects changed their initial decision about the direction of motion and more frequently, about their confidence. We show that confidence and choice are informed by the same evidence, both at the initial choice and on any subsequent revision.
Scientists have found a new type of RNA called a lncRNA (long noncoding RNA) induced by the p53 protein in response to DNA damage. The RNA, which they named PINCR (p53-induced noncoding RNA), exerts a prosurvival function in human colorectal cancer cells in vitro and in tumour growth in vivo. PINCR associates with RNA-binding protein Matrin 3 and enhances the response to DNA damage, allowing the cell to recover. The team found that PINCR shortage in CRC cells caused hypersensitivity to anti-cancer drugs, indicating that it is a promising target for cancer drug development.
Studies of Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), a nematode, have identified two different types of homeostatic responses during the sleep-like state (lethargus). In the first type of response, prolonged motion causes an extension of quiescence in the absence of weak or no stimuli, the second type of response occurs in the presence of strong stimuli and manifests itself as an overall elevation of the time spent in quiescence, a response which requires the function of the DAF-16/FOXO transcription factor in neurons, but not NPR-1. The use of both mammalian and non-mammalian models has suggested that sleep is phylogenetically ancient and evolutionarily conserved. The key behavioral hallmarks of sleep are episodic reduced motion, reversibility, typical postures, sensory gating, and homeostasis. Studies of C. elegans have shown that they exhibit sleep-like states during a developmental stage preceding the termination of each larval stage. In this study, the behavior of sleeping nematodes under undisturbed, weakly disturbed and strongly disturbed conditions was analysed. The results showed that the durations of bouts of quiescence were coupled to a measure of increased sleep pressure, and homeostatic regulation dynamically maintains an appropriate quiescence baseline. Interestingly, the homeostatic routine stabilization of motion and quiescence in low-noise environments is mechanistically distinct from homeostatic responses following strong, stressful, disruptions.
The document discusses the concept of collateral sensitivity and resistance, which refers to the phenomenon where mutations that confer resistance to one drug may also elicit sensitivity or resistance to other drugs. The use of multi-drug treatments exploiting such trade-offs can help slow down the evolution of resistance. However, if mutations with diverse collateral effects are available, a treated population may evolve either collateral sensitivity or collateral resistance, making it unclear how to design treatments that are robust to such uncertainty. The paper proposes to characterize such diversity with a joint distribution of fitness effects (JDFE) and develops a theory for describing and predicting collateral evolution based on simple statistics of the JDFE. The paper shows how to robustly rank drug pairs to minimize the risk of collateral resistance and how to estimate JDFEs. The rest of the paper explains the theory, presents some practical guidance for estimating the pleiotropy statistics of empirical JDFEs in the context of ranking drug pairs, and applies the theory to analyze datasets from various experiments.
The formation of memories in neural circuits is not fully understood, but courtship memory in Drosophila relies on a recurrent circuit between mushroom body gamma (MBγ), M6 output, and aSP13 dopaminergic neurons. The persistent activity of aSP13 neurons within this circuit lays the foundation for a short-term courtship memory. The involvement of MBγ and M6 neurons in courtship conditioning was confirmed by silencing them using cell-type specific GAL4 drivers. The persistent activity of aSP13 neurons mediates plasticity at the MBγ to the M6 synapses that can last from minutes to hours. The dopamine modulates cholinergic synaptic transmission from MBγ to M6 neurons, and upon repetitive stimulation of MBγ neurons, endogenous dopamine enables synaptic transmission to M6 neurons. Activation of M6 neurons produces a strong calcium response in aSP13 neurons and vice versa.
The document discusses the strategies individuals use during competitive situations to select actions that can surprise their opponent. These unpredictable actions can be generated based on models of the opponent's strategy and choice history or by choosing actions in a memory-free, stochastic manner. The experiments conducted show that people toggle between these two strategies, depending on recent wins or losses. After wins, feedback-related EEG activity reflects information about the opponent's global and local strategy and predicts upcoming choices, whereas after losses this activity is nearly absent, indicating that the internal model is suppressed after negative feedback. The document suggests that people use a mixed-strategy approach that allows for negotiating two conflicting goals: exploiting the opponent's deviations from randomness while remaining unpredictable for the opponent. The study used a matching-pennies game with simulated and human opponents to explore these concepts.
The article discusses the importance of correct reading frame maintenance for accurate translation of mRNA into protein. The authors identify specific proteins that work together to prevent frameshifting at inhibitory CGA-CGA codon pairs in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The study identifies the involvement of Mbf1, Ribosomal proteins Rps3/uS3, and eukaryotic Asc1/RACK1 in maintaining the reading frame of stalled ribosomes. The researchers provide insights into the precise frameshift at inhibitory CGA-CGG codon pairs through mass spectrometry. The study shows that proteins other than Asc1 also contribute to reading frame maintenance at CGA codon repeats. The researchers developed a selection process to isolate mutants that frameshift due to translation of CGA codon repeats.
New research on lampreys indicates that the optic tectum (superior colliculus) of vertebrates can perform multisensory computations independently and hence configure final motor commands, without being mandated by forebrain organisation. Single tectal neurons receive visual and electrosensory inputs and when these two inputs overlap, response enhancement of output neurons occurs locally in the tectum, whereas surrounding areas and temporally misaligned inputs are inhibited. Multisensory inputs can thereby regulate event-detection within the tectum through local inhibition without forebrain control.
A study by researchers at the University of Groningen shows that bacterial flotillins play an important role in maintaining membrane fluidity homeostasis. The research suggests that the absence of flotillins results in decreased membrane fluidity leading to alterations in peptidoglycan synthesis. Flotillins are required for the direct control of membrane fluidity rather than for the formation of protein complexes. The team also found that the absence of flotillins led to an increase in overall lipid packing in the membrane, resulting in altered MreB dynamics and cell morphology. The research suggests that flotillins are important for membrane structure and function in fast growth conditions and nutrient-depleted environments.
Large animals are at an increased risk of developing cancer due to the increased number of cells they have. However, there is no correlation between body size and cancer risk, a phenomenon known as 'Peto's Paradox'. The study found that the elephant genome encodes 20 copies of the tumor suppressor gene TP53, which likely played a direct role in the evolution of very large body sizes and the resolution of Peto's paradox in Proboscideans. TP53RTGs, retrogenes of TP53, contribute to the enhanced sensitivity of elephant cells to DNA damage and the induction of apoptosis by regulating activity of the TP53 signaling pathway. The expansion of TP53RTG gene family in the Proboscidean lineage occurred through segmental duplications, likely due to repeated segmental duplications of chromosomal loci containing TP53RTG genes. The study suggests that the origin of large body sizes, long lifespans, and enhanced cancer resistance in the elephant lineage evolved at least in part through reinforcing the anti-cancer mechanisms of TP53.
The JNK pathway, which responds to metabolic stress, regulates energy expenditure and insulin resistance through the JNK1 and JNK2 isoforms. However, the role of the neuron-specific isoform, JNK3, in maintaining energy balance is unclear. Researchers have now found that JNK3 deficiency leads to hyperphagia in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD), through regulation by AgRP neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. Under HFD conditions, JNK3 regulates leptin signalling by promoting it, in order to maintain energy balance. Reduced leptin signalling caused by increased circulating levels of leptin can lead to obesity and metabolic disorders such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hepatitis, neurodegeneration and cancer.
The study investigates the effects of aneuploidy on chromosome segregation and other mitotic phenotypes using a colorectal cancer cell line with trisomy 7 or 13, and euploid and trisomy 13 amniocytes. Aneuploidy induces chromosome mis-segregation and cytokinesis failure, leading to aneuploidy-dependent increases in karyotypic heterogeneity. The study shows that certain aneuploidies confer a proliferative advantage to cancer cells by inducing chromosome-specific phenotypic changes such as drug resistance.
A study has found that actin, a protein involved in cytoskeletal dynamics, stabilizes an eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2α) phosphatase that activates the integrated stress response (ISR), which is a pathway that defends against multiple stress factors. The study found that actin interacts with the PPP1R15 regulatory subunit to promote eIF2α-directed phosphatase activity. Actin's abundance depends on the polymeric status of actin, which influences the downstream ISR. The study also found that PPP1R15 regulatory subunits in different eukaryotic organisms interact with actin across phyla, implicating a conserved actin-cytoskeletal mechanism in regulating protein biosynthesis during the ISR.
Researchers have developed a new method, called 'automatic mitochondrial copy (AutoMitoC)', for estimating mitochondrial DNA copy number (mtDNA-CN) suitable for large-scale biobank studies. Using this method, they performed genome- and exome-wide association studies on 395,781 UKBiobank study participants and identified novel genetic determinants of mtDNA-CN. They also performed Mendelian randomization analyses to assess the causal effect of low mtDNA-CN on dementia risk. The results indicate that mtDNA-CN is a complex biomarker reflecting specific mitochondrial processes related to mtDNA regulation, and that these processes are causally related to human diseases. Among other findings, researchers identified 71 loci for mtDNA-CN that implicated genes involved in rare mtDNA depletion disorders, deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) metabolism, and the mitochondrial central dogma. Rare variant analysis identified SAMHD1 mutation carriers as having higher mtDNA-CN, potentially an attractive therapeutic target for patients with mtDNA depletion disorders, but they were also deemed to be at increased risk of breast cancer. Lastly, Mendelian randomization analyses suggest a causal effect of low mtDNA-CN on dementia risk.
Researchers have developed an approach to quantify hair pigmentation patterns (HPPs) along individual human hair shafts, allowing them to measure the reversibility of hair greying in humans. They found that white/grey hairs can regain pigmentation naturally, and that molecularly, grey hairs upregulate proteins related to energy metabolism, mitochondria, and antioxidant defenses. The study also shows that hair greying and reversal can occur in parallel with psychological stressors. The study provides a way to longitudinally examine the influence of recent life exposures on human biology by mapping recent life history in HPPs. The approach could be used to interrogate the association of life stress and hair greying in humans. The study was supported by the Wharton Fund and NIH grants GM119793, MH119336, and AG066828.
A study mapping viral distribution of COVID-19 in deceased patients found high viral loads in most patients' lungs, but the virus was also present in extrapulmonary tissues and organs without visible tissue damage. The study also found elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines and prothrombotic factors, indicating a maladaptive host response with viremia and multiorgan dysfunction. The investigation of COVID-19 patients included a full characterization of clinical characteristics and parameters. The study suggests that COVID-19 is a systemic disease with varying degrees of severity, and further research is needed to understand the pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Insulin gene mutations are a common cause of neonatal diabetes leading to proinsulin misfolding, resulting in increased ER-stress suggested to trigger beta-cell apoptosis. A study of two Finnish families with hereditary neonatal diabetes due to heterozygous insulin gene mutations shows that PNDM-associated insulin mutations lead to inadequate development of a functional beta-cell mass, contributing to diabetes development. iPSCs from those affected were differentiated to beta-like cells and compared to correction-controlled control lines, with mutants showing reduced proliferation and insulin secretion and increased ER-stress, yet without increased apoptosis. Additionally, scRNA sequencing showed increased expression of ER stress-associated transcripts in mutant cells, and differentiation concerns highlight the need to study the impact of genetic variation in the differentiation of iPSCs to beta-cells.
Researchers have discovered how the nucleolus, the site of ribosome biogenesis and a cellular stress sensor, organises itself. The structure, which is a membrane-less organelle, is formed through liquid-liquid phase separation of its components from the surrounding nucleoplasm. In a paper published in eLife, the team discovered that nucleophosmin (NPM1) plays a key role in organising the fluid-like structure of the nucleolus, thereby aiding ribosome biogenesis, genome stability and tumour suppression. The researchers used biophysical approaches to show that NPM1 integrates into the nucleolus, binding to proteins with arginine-rich linear motifs and ribosomal RNA, subsequently phase separating with them to form droplets that aid the formation of the GC.
A new computational approach called CompoMug has been developed to predict stabilizing mutations in G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), a family of transmembrane proteins targeted by 40% of all therapeutic drugs. The approach combines knowledge-based analysis, sequence-based analysis, structural information, and machine learning. The approach was tested on the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor and resulted in the identification of 10 new stabilizing mutations, some of which enabled crystallization and structure determination for the receptor complex. The CompoMug tool provides a cost- and time-effective alternative for GPCR stabilization and can be further developed with accumulated experimental data.
Researchers have investigated the role of maternal vs. zygotic Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) protein EED in orchestrating imprinted X-inactivation in mouse embryos. Imprinted X-inactivation silences genes exclusively on the paternally-inherited X-chromosome and is a paradigm of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance in mammals. The study found that maternal-null (Eedm-/-) but not zygotic-null (Eed-/-) early embryos underwent ectopic imprinted X-inactivation, suggesting that maternal EED is necessary for proper inactivation. This effect was exacerbated in embryos lacking both maternal and zygotic EED. The study concludes that expression of PRC2 in the oocyte and transmission of the gene products to the embryo may dictate the occurrence of imprinted X-inactivation in mammals. X-inactivation results in the mitotically-stable transcriptional inactivation of one of the two X-chromosomes in female mammals to equalize X-linked gene expression between males and females.
Researchers have proposed a new Bayesian method to estimate population prevalence in individual participants in neuroscience, psychology, and neuroimaging studies. Rather than testing the null hypothesis significance testing (NHST) of the population mean, the method infers the prevalence of an effect in the population from the proportion of participants showing that effect. The approach provides population-level inference and can improve replicability in these fields by detecting effects within individual participants. The method also offers a quantitative estimate with associated uncertainty rather than reducing experiments to binary inferences. The method can be applied to a range of studies and provides a shift in perspective towards experimental assessment within individual participants.
Researchers have found that the brains of sighted adults can be reorganised to process Braille, in a study that offers the first definitive evidence that large-scale reshaping of the visual cortex is possible in healthy adults. The study asked sighted adults to take a nine-month course in reading Braille, while monitoring their activity with Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI) and Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). The results indicated that large-scale reorganisation of the brain was required to carry out the task. The study presented a challenge to the established view of adult neural plasticity, which sees it as confined within specific boundaries where the brain processes particular types of stimuli.
The paper proposes a new framework for modeling dopamine function in the mammalian brain, suggesting that both learning and action planning involve processes minimizing prediction errors encoded by dopaminergic neurons. It explains how different populations of dopaminergic neurons encode errors in predictions made by corresponding systems within the basal ganglia, and how these prediction errors trigger learning about rewards and habit formation. The framework also incorporates recent theories of habit formation and assumes that the most appropriate actions are identified through Bayesian inference. The paper provides an overview of computations taking place during action planning in the DopAct framework, and how these computations could be implemented in neural circuits including dopaminergic neurons. The paper makes several experimentally testable predictions and provides a foundation for a framework accounting for the role of dopamine in both learning and action planning.
Researchers have used a combination of quantitative single-cell tracing and computational simulation to understand the mode of proliferation of biliary epithelial cells (BECs) during liver regeneration. Using a mouse liver injury model, they found that a select population of BECs continued to proliferate and made a significant contribution to the expansion of the biliary structure, rather than a stem cell hierarchy. The study discovered previously unknown heterogeneity among BECs in their proliferation potential and sheds light on the complex tissue dynamics involved in liver regeneration. The study relied on the development of new imaging methods including high-resolution 3D imaging and quantitative single-cell tracing.
Loss of ESCRT function in Drosophila imaginal discs causes neoplastic overgrowth and mis-regulation of signaling pathways, but its impact on junctional integrity has not been well established. This study used transmission electron microscopy on wing imaginal discs depleted of the ESCRT-III core component Shrub and found that Shrub is specifically required for maintaining septate junction integrity by transporting the claudin Megatrachea to the junction. Moreover, ESCRT and retromer functions are required for the biosynthetic delivery of SJ core components to the junction, revealing a novel physiological role for retromer. In addition to acting as an ancient endosomal agent, the endosomal system also fulfills a plethora of physiological functions by regulating the intracellular transport of transmembrane proteins and membranes within the cell. The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) and the retromer complex mediate cargo sorting into degradative and recycling pathways, respectively. ESCRT loss of function induces neoplastic overgrowth, multilayering, apoptosis, and invasive behavior of tissues, a phenotype attributed to mis-regulation of cellular signaling pathways. The study analyzed the integrity of cellular junctions in an ESCRT-depleted wing imaginal disc epithelium using transmission electron microscopy and found a strong and specific reduction in the density of SJ.
The article discusses the role of a protein called NOCA-1 in the assembly of non-centrosomal microtubule arrays in multiple tissues in Caenorhabditis elegans. NOCA-1 shares homology with vertebrate ninein and works redundantly with the minus end protection factor Patronin/PTRN-1 to assemble a circumferential microtubule array essential for worm growth and morphogenesis in the larval epidermis. The study highlights functional overlap between the ninein and Patronin protein families and suggests that NOCA-1 works with γ-tubulin to direct the assembly of non-centrosomal arrays in multiple tissues. The article also highlights the importance of identifying the factors that control the assembly of non-centrosomal arrays and determining the extent of overlap between the mechanisms utilized at centrosomes and non-centrosomal sites in different tissues.
The regulation of stem cell homeostasis in plant shoot meristems is achieved through two intertwined pathways that adjust the activity of WUSCHEL (WUS) and incorporate information on the size of the stem cell domain, via CLAVATA3-CLAVATA1, and on cell differentiation via CLE40-barely any meristem 1 (BAM1). Stem cells express secreted dodecapeptide CLAVATA3 (CLV3), which signals through CLAVATA1 and related CLAVATA1-family members to downregulate WUS expression. CLE40 promotes WUS expression via BAM1, a CLAVATA1-family receptor, and CLE40 expression is repressed in a WUS-dependent manner. Together, CLE40-BAM1-WUS establishes a second negative feedback loop. Stem cell proliferation and cell differentiation in both regions are closely connected. The stem cell-promoting pathway was not identified so far. CLE40 could act in a CLV3-related pathway in shoot stem cell control. CLE40 mainly promotes inflorescence meristem growth, whereas CLV3 serves to restrict both inflorescence meristem and flower meristem sizes.
The age of centrosomes affects their behavior in asymmetric stem cell divisions, but it is assumed that old and young centrosomes behave equally in symmetric divisions. However, a study has found that kinetochore-microtubules associated with old centrosomes are more stable and bias the alignment of polar chromosomes. This bias is due to the presence of cenexin, a protein enriched on old centrosomes, which causes daughter cells with old centrosomes to retain non-disjoint chromosomes 85% of the time. This indicates that centrosome age imposes a functional asymmetry on all mitotic spindles, even
The region upstream of the MYC oncogene on chromosome 8q24 is important for the development of several major types of human cancer. However, its role in normal development has not been studied. A team of scientists has now shown that deleting a 538 kb section of this region in mice results in a decrease in Myc expression of up to 80% in multiple tissues, and the mice are resistant to tumorigenesis. Although the mice are viable with no overt phenotype, most normal cells isolated from them grow slowly in culture. The researchers suggest that targeting this region could be a promising strategy for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Although this region is important for cancer, it is also crucial for normal physiological growth control of cells responding to damage signals. This work involved generating multiple mouse strains deficient in regulatory elements upstream of the Myc promoter, causing no major defects in normal development or haematopoiesis.
This study aims to understand how B lymphocytes discriminate the stiffness of antigens presented on substrates in the extracellular microenvironment during B cell activation. The mechanism by which B cells sense physical signals and translate them into chemical signals and cellular responses remains unclear, and this study reports that B cell activation requires B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling molecules. Results suggest that PKCβ-dependent activation of FAK is required for B cells to discriminate substrate stiffness, leading to FAK-mediated potentiation of B cell spreading and adhesion responses. The study also examines the contribution of adhesion molecules, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, and determines that the “outside-in” activation of integrin greatly enhances the B cell's capability to discriminate substrate stiffness. Lastly, the research suggests that the altered stiffness properties of the extracellular matrix are linked to the dysregulated activation of auto-antigen reactive B cells in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Overall, the study provides a molecular explanation of how initiation of B cell activation discriminates substrate stiffness and improves understanding of the sophisticated mechanosensing capability of B lymphocytes.
The proper development of the CNS axon-glia unit requires bi-directional communication between axons and oligodendrocytes. Research has shown that the lipid phosphatidylinositol-3, 5-bisphosphate [PI(3,5)P2] is required in neurons and in oligodendrocytes for normal CNS myelination. Mutations of genes encoding key components of the PI(3,5)P2 biosynthetic complex lead to impaired OL maturation, severe CNS hypomyelination and delayed propagation of compound action potentials. PI(3,5)P2 deficiency leads to accumulation of myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) in LAMP1+ vesicles that fail to migrate to the nascent myelin sheet. These studies identify PI(3,5)P2 as a key regulator of myelin membrane trafficking and myelinogenesis. Disorders associated with defective CNS white matter range from multiple sclerosis and inherited leukodystrophies to psychiatric disorders. FIG4 is an evolutionarily conserved lipid phosphatase that removes the 5’ phosphate group from phosphatidylinositol (3,5) bisphosphate [PI(3,5)P2] to produce PI(3)P. Proper CNS myelination is dependent upon oligodendrocyte (OL) cell-autonomous (intrinsic) functions of FIG4, in addition
The capacity of organisms to adapt to different selection pressures in natural environments is limited by constraints on phenotypic variation. Researchers select Escherichia coli (E. coli) for faster migration through a porous environment, which is dependent on motility and growth, to better understand the evolutionary dynamics in this context. They find that a trade-off between swimming speed and growth rate constrains the evolution of faster migration. This trade-off is mediated by antagonistic pleiotropy through mutations that affect negative regulation, and the direction of evolution is determined by the genetic variance of each trait when selection acts simultaneously on two traits governed by a trade-off. The environment also determines the evolutionary trajectory in this process. The results can help predict evolution in complex environments by quantifying both trade-offs and selection pressures.
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are a group of cells involved in many aspects of host defence, including in the development of inflammatory disorders such as colitis. Researchers have identified two key mechanisms by which these small numbers of ILCs are able to orchestrate an inflammatory response in the gut. Firstly, that interleukin (IL)-23-driven granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) production by ILC3s is critical for the development of colitis, and secondly, that ILCs mobilize from cryptopatches in a highly dynamic process that contributes to the ability of ILCs to coordinate the immune response in the gut. Blocking the production of GM-CSF reduced the number of inflammatory monocytes in the colon of anti-CD40 treated mice and reduced both weight loss and severity of colitis, and similar effects were also observed in bacteria-induced innate colitis following infection of mice with Helicobacter hepaticus. While a small proportion of epithelial, stromal, or lineage positive (CD11b, CD11c, Gr-1, B220, CD49b) cells could produce GM-CSF, the majority of GM-CSF producers were ILCs, revealing them as a major source of GM-CSF.
Bone cells, specifically osteocytes and osteoblasts, respond to mechanical stimulation by releasing ATP, which stimulates calcium responses in neighboring cells. ATP release is one of the earliest responses to mechanical stimulation and is mainly released through vesicular exocytosis or conductive release via channels. The study found that mechanically induced ATP release is related to membrane injury and repair, as Ca2+/PLC/PKC-dependent vesicular exocytosis facilitated membrane repair, thereby minimizing cell injury and reducing ATP release. The study also showed that increased vesicular release is consistently associated with a reduction in mechanically stimulated ATP release, while inhibition of vesicular exocytosis increased ATP release from mechanically stimulated osteoblasts. In vivo experiments showed that mechanical loading results in cellular membrane disruption, and with time, the damaged tissues can repair themselves.
Scientists have developed a high-throughput functional selection process to isolate DNA fragments from human oral and fecal metagenomes that inhibit Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpyCas9) in Escherichia coli. The most potent of the DNA fragments, AcrIIA11, was recovered from a Lachnospiraceae phage, and it was found to inhibit SpyCas9 in bacteria and human cells via a different mechanism than other previously characterised Type II-A Acrs. The study demonstrates the power of functional selection to uncover widespread Cas9 inhibitors within diverse microbiomes.
Scientists have used CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to edit the genome of Schistosoma mansoni, a parasite responsible for schistosomiasis, a debilitating and often deadly disease. Specifically, the researchers targeted the omega-1 gene, which is crucial for the development of Th2 cells and granuloma formation. The eggs of the parasite were exposed to the Cas9 complexed with guide RNA and a single-stranded donor template, resulting in mutated alleles and depletion of the omega-1 protein. The gene-edited eggs did not induce Th2 responses in co-cultured macrophages and T cells and resulted in a reduction in granuloma volume when injected into mice. CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing could significantly aid in the study of functional genomics in schistosomes and lead to deeper insights into the parasites' pathogenesis, biology, and evolution.
A study investigates whether the premotor circuitry of jaw and tongue muscles contain elements for coordination. Using a modified monosynaptic rabies virus-based transsynaptic tracing strategy, the study mapped premotor neurons for the jaw-closing masseter muscle and the tongue-protruding genioglossus muscle, revealing several premotor connection configurations that are perfectly suited for coordinating bilaterally symmetric jaw movements and for co-activating specific jaw, tongue, and facial muscles. The findings suggest that shared premotor neurons that form specific multi-target connections with selected motoneurons are a simple and general solution to the problem of orofacial coordination. Behaviours are executed through coordinated activity of multiple groups of motor neurons and their muscle targets.
The impact of disrupting growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) in mice on longevity and delayed aging mechanisms was examined. The results showed that GHRH knockout mice had increased lifespan, major shifts in gene expression related to stress resistance, insulin signaling and xenobiotic detoxification. Furthermore, these mice had increased adiponectin levels and glucose homeostasis alterations consistent with the removal of the counter-insulin effects of growth hormone. The study concluded that GHRH-KO mice feature perturbations in a network of signaling pathways related to stress resistance, metabolic control and inflammation, and therefore provide a new model that can be used to explore links between GHRH repression, downregulation of the somatotropic axis and extended longevity.
A study on pigeons has found that the luminance cells in the nucleus dorsolateralis anterior thalami (DLA) show oscillatory activities that match the rhythmic luminance changes of repetitive light/dark (LD) stimuli. After LD stimulation, some DLA cells retained their entrained oscillatory activities, indicating that the DLA may be involved in coding the temporal information of periodic visual stimuli. The study suggests that the experience-dependent representation of time interval in the brain may occur as early as at the thalamic level, rather than solely at the pallial/cortical level. The ability to process and sense the temporal information of external stimuli is fundamental for humans and animals to adapt to the environment. The study suggests that birds, such as the pigeon, may be useful animal models for studying time-dependent cognitive tasks, such as interval timing and sequence learning.
During starvation-induced stress, COPII vesicles, which normally transport secretory cargo to the Golgi, have been implicated as a membrane source for autophagosomes. The mechanism by which cells regulate core trafficking machinery to fulfill dramatically different cellular roles in response to environmental cues is unknown. However, a study has found that phosphorylation of conserved amino acids on the membrane-distal surface of the Sec24 cargo adaptor of the COPII coat in yeast reprograms COPII vesicles for autophagy. The study proposes that the acute need to produce autophagosomes during starvation drives the interaction of Sec24 with Atg9 to increase autophagosome abundance.
A study using zebrafish models has shown that the chromatin remodeler protein smarca5 plays a role in preventing the formation of blood clots in red blood cells (RBCs). Loss of smarca5 was found to result in decreased chromatin accessibility at keap1a promoter, and decreased expression of keap1a--a suppressor protein of Nrf2, which regulates the expression of oxidative response genes. The disruption of Keap1-Nrf2 signaling led to the formation of RBC blood clots in smarca5 mutant zebrafish embryos. The study suggests that smarca5 deficiency in RBCs may provide a new animal model for venous thrombosis and may help to screen drugs for clinical therapy.
A study has used optical trapping and biochemical reconstitution with myosin motor proteins to investigate how force affects the interactions between actin filaments (F-actin) and associated proteins. The study found that forces of around 1 picoNewton applied solely to F-actin can enhance binding by αE-catenin, an essential cell-cell adhesion protein, but not its homolog vinculin. The study revealed that the α-catenin’s C-terminus is a modular detector of F-actin tension which regulates cellular adhesion. The study also found that both proteins share an overlapping major actin-binding site but undergo markedly different rearrangements at their flexible N- and C-termini upon binding. The study points out that diverse force regimes regulate the polymerization dynamics, micron-scale architecture, and protein composition of actin assemblies in molecular mechanisms that are not yet clear. This research provides valuable insight into how cells probe and respond to the mechanical properties of their surroundings through cytoskeletal networks composed of actin filaments, myosin motor proteins, and dozens of actin-binding proteins.
Researchers have identified a subset of mouse macrophages that capture the HIV-1 envelope protein gp120 from the afferent lymph following injection of the protein into the interfollicular channel (IFC). The macrophages, which express the protein SIGN-R1, reside in the IFC and cortical ridge and sinuses and extend to the LN follicles. In addition, the researchers discovered that the subset of macrophages produce interferon-γ, likely as a result of the uptake of gp120. The team believes that this method of antigen delivery is tailored to expose trafficking naïve B cells to pathogen-derived glycoproteins such as gp120.  
The brain uses internal models to guide limb movements by taking in sensory information, tracking the state of the limb, and producing motor commands. The internal model describes the brain's prior beliefs about how the limb responds to motor commands. This study used a brain-machine interface paradigm in rhesus monkeys and statistical analyses of neural population activity to gain insight into moment-by-moment internal model computations. The researchers discovered that a mismatch between subjects' internal models and the actual BMI explains roughly 65% of movement errors, as well as long-standing deficiencies in BMI speed control. This work provides an approach for interpreting neural population activity in the context of how prior beliefs guide the transformation of sensory input to motor output.
This document describes a study on the role of prior experience and neuronal mechanisms in the acquisition of novel, related information. The researchers investigated the development of novel spatial representations in mice during spatial exploration and their relation to the internal neuronal dynamics preceding and following the new experience. They found that specific representations of de novo experiences on linear environments were formed on a framework of pre-configured network activity expressed in the preceding sleep and were rapidly adjusted via NMDAR-dependent activity. CA3 NMDARs facilitated the de novo learning of an alternation task, accelerating subsequent learning of related tasks in a CA3 NMDAR-independent manner, consistent with schema-based learning. The results suggest that CA3 NMDAR-dependent activity and plasticity are specifically involved in rapid within-session changes in single and ensemble place cell activity.
The transcription factor c-Myc plays a critical role in T cell expansion and differentiation. A new study has used mass-spectrometry to reveal how c-Myc controls antigen receptor driven cell growth and proteome restructuring in murine T cells. The study has identified both Myc dependent and independent metabolic processes in immune activated T cells. The research has shown that a primary function of Myc is to control expression of multiple amino acid transporters and loss of a single Myc-controlled amino acid transporter effectively impacts the overall performance of T cells. The study provides a comprehensive map of how Myc selectively shapes T cell phenotypes, revealing that Myc induction of amino acid transport is pivotal for subsequent bioenergetic and biosynthetic programs and licences T cell receptor driven proteome reprogramming.
Plants shed senescent and damaged organs regularly during their life cycle. The leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase (LRR-RK) HAESA and peptide hormone IDA are responsible for floral abscission, but how IDA expression leads to HAESA activation is unknown. Recent research has found that the HAESA ectodomain senses IDA, and crystal structures of HAESA in complex with IDA demonstrate that the peptide hormone binds to a hormone binding pocket and is anchored by a central hydroxyproline residue to the receptor. The HAESA co-receptor SERK1 allows for high-affinity sensing of the peptide hormone by binding to an Arg-His-Asn motif in IDA. The results suggest that plant peptide hormone receptors may share a common ligand binding mode and activation mechanism.
A study of 31,910 prokaryotic genomes has identified extracytosolic ApbEs in around half of bacteria and revealed the involvement of flavinylation in several unknown biochemical processes including iron reduction and assimilation. The analysis also identified five protein classes responsible for transmembrane electron transfer and two domains of unknown function (DUF2271 and DUF3570) that are flavinylated by ApbE. The study suggests that ApbE-flavinylated proteins are involved in bacterial extracytosolic electron transfer and function alongside cytochromes and thioredoxin-like proteins. The study also unveils a class of multi-flavinylated proteins that may resemble multi-heme cytochromes in facilitating longer distance electron transfer.
Exosomes are small vesicles secreted from cells that may convey selected membrane proteins and small RNAs to target cells for the control of cell migration, development, and metastasis. Researchers have identified a set of miRNAs enriched in exosomes with respect to their cellular levels. Using immunoisolated CD63-containing exosomes, a team has explored the biochemical requirements for exosome biogenesis and RNA packaging. They found that the RNA-binding protein Y-box protein I (YBX1) is required for the sorting of miR-223 in the cell-free reaction and serves an important role in the secretion of miRNAs in exosomes by HEK293T cells. Exosome-specific miRNAs are estimated to account for 4.4% of total mapped reads in the cell-free reaction. It was also reported that extracellular vesicle-bound RNAs, including a subclass called exosomes are enriched in specific classes of RNAs, including small RNAs and microRNA.
The way in which host and microbial factors work together to structure the gut microbiome is not completely understood. Redox potential, which is important in shaping the environment and influenced by both host and microbial actions, can be affected by antibiotics. Researchers investigated how antibiotics change redox state and how this contributes to changes in the gut microbiome. The study found that redox potential increased within hours of an antibiotic dose in mice and was associated with the suppression of bacteria. Blooms of the Enterobacteriaceae bacterial family were linked to changes in redox dynamics. Recovery of gut redox was associated with returning to the pre-treatment composition, which required the dispersal of unaffected gut communities, highlighting the potential for manipulating gut microbiota through managing bacterial respiration.
Bacteria have strategies for coping with a variety of threats, including antagonistic factors produced by other bacteria. One such strategy involves the deployment of antibacterial factors triggered by the lysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells, a program called P. aeruginosa response to antagonism (PARA), which is mediated by the Gac/Rsm global regulatory pathway. The type VI secretion and conjugative type IV secretion systems in competing bacteria induce P. aeruginosa lysis and activate PARA, thereby enhancing P. aeruginosa's ability to target bacteria that produce these factors. These findings suggest that bacteria sense damaged kin and mount a complex response via a widely distributed pathway, raising the possibility that danger sensing is an evolutionarily conserved process in bacteria.
Undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) contain only six TBP-associated factors (TAFs) out of approximately 14 that comprise the general transcription factor TFIID, whereas differentiated hESCs express all TAFs. Directed and global chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses reveal a promoter occupancy pattern where most active genes are bound by only TAFs 3 and 5 along with TBP, whereas the remaining active genes are bound by TBP and all six hESC TAFs. Altering the composition of hESC TAFs results in misregulated expression of pluripotency genes and differentiation. The selective expression and use of TAFs underlies the ability of hESCs to self-renew.
Scientists have discovered that a type of neuron in grasshoppers called the lobula giant movement detector (LGMD) can detect the coherence of a simulated impending object, which is critical for proper escape behavior. The object segmentation relies on the precise selection of the spatiotemporal pattern of synaptic inputs by dendritic membrane potential-activated channels. The LGMD's selectivity for the spatial characteristics of an approaching object is likely determined by active processing within the dendrites of field A. The study also found that hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated nonselective cation channels within the retinotopic dendrites interact with other membrane channels to enhance this discrimination, and this neural selectivity influences the animal's ability to effectively avoid approaching predators.
Small heat shock proteins (sHSPs) act as first responders to maintain proteins in a soluble state and delay aggregation in response to cellular stress. However, their active form and how they interact with partly unfolded or aggregate-prone proteins to prevent formation of aggregates remain unclear. Researchers investigated the impact of pH on the HSPB5-ACD dimer, the universal building block of sHSPs, and found that dimer stability decreases over a narrow physiologically relevant pH range, and a conserved histidine residue is largely responsible for the destabilization. Mutations that destabilize the dimer interface produce large oligomers that can form distinct complexes with a model client protein. Results suggest HSPB5 has a repertoire of ways in which it can carry out its function and highlights differences in the ways in which holdases work.

A study has found that copy number alterations (CNA) burden in primary and metastatic tumors can serve as a prognostic factor for cancer recurrence and death in multiple cancer types. The research analyzed the CNA landscapes of conservatively treated prostate cancer in a biopsy and transurethral resection cohort and found that CNA burden was prognostic for cancer-specific death. The study noted that, in addition to being significantly associated with disease-free and overall survival, tumor CNA burden may also serve as a prognostic factor for cancer recurrence and death in patients who undergo conservative treatment approaches.
Researchers have identified the structural determinants of fidaxomicin (Fdx), an antimicrobial RNA polymerase (RNAP) inhibitor that is highly effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis RNAP, making it a potential new treatment option for tuberculosis. The study determined the 3.4 Å cryo-electron microscopy structure of a complete M. tuberculosis RNAP holoenzyme in complex with Fdx, finding that Fdx acts as a doorstop to jam the enzyme in an open state, preventing the motions necessary to secure promoter DNA in the active site. The study also establishes that the actinobacteria general transcription factor RbpA is vital to the sensitivity of M. tuberculosis to Fdx. The results could guide the development of anti-tuberculosis antimicrobials based on the Fdx binding pocket.
Pioneer transcription factors play an important role in gene regulation as they recognize and bind to target sequences in inaccessible chromatin, allowing for the establishment of new transcriptional networks during development and cellular reprogramming. However, the mechanisms by which these factors achieve chromatin accessibility are not fully understood. In a study using mouse embryonic stem cells, researchers discovered that the pluripotency-associated pioneer factor OCT4 binds to chromatin and recruits the chromatin remodeller BRG1 to establish accessible chromatin state, supporting additional transcription factor binding and expression of the pluripotency-associated transcriptome. They found that OCT4-bound regulatory sites that require BRG1 are activated more slowly in response to cellular reprogramming and later during early development. This study reveals a distinct requirement for a chromatin remodeller in promoting the activity of the pioneer factor OCT4 and regulating the pluripotency network.
Researchers have developed a method that uses optogenetics and calcium imaging to simultaneously manipulate and monitor neural activity in the brain of living mice. The all-optical technique enables the scientists to read and write neuronal activity with cellular resolution, and could help decipher the function of neuronal circuits in 3D, including analysing cell connectivity and information processing. The researchers stimulating up to 80 neurons over 150 μm in mouse neocortex in vivo in three-dimensions (3D) with cellular resolution. The system photostimulated large groups of cells simultaneously using a hybrid holographic approach in layer 2/3 of primary visual cortex in awake mice.
Researchers have questioned the assumption that the Brownian ratchet mechanism for transcription elongation allows RNA polymerase to achieve equilibrium between pre-and post- translocated states rapidly relative to catalysis. Instead, the researchers found that both the translocation and catalysis rates must be rate-limiting, pointing to a linear, non-branched ratchet mechanism. They calculated a simplified energy landscape for the process and showed that the backwards rather than forward state is thermodynamically favoured but the forward state is kinetically favoured, with these features conferring the enzyme's propensity to pause and providing the basis for transcriptional regulation. The researchers suggest the bridge helix and trigger loop regions of the RNA polymerase control enzyme translocation, catalysis, and pausing. The Michaelis-Menten equation was used to characterise the polymerase's velocity, which follows the relationship between the pause-free velocity and nucleotide concentration, and allowed the researchers to analyse both the nucleotide addition and pausing phases of the elongation cycle.
Phytophagous insects use taste organs containing bitter gustatory receptors (GRs) to identify host plants, and researchers have analyzed the function of GRs in larvae of Plutella xylostella, a Lepidoptera that causes significant crop damage. By using transcriptome analysis and qPCR, researchers were able to detect PxylGr34 transcripts in the larval head and adult antennae. Functional analyses using the Xenopus oocyte expression system identified that PxylGr34 is tuned to the plant hormones brassinolide (BL) and 24-epibrassinolide (EBL) and that electrophysiological analyses showed that the medial sensilla styloconica of 4th instar larvae were responsive to BL and EBL. Dual-choice bioassays demonstrated that BL inhibits larval feeding and female oviposition. Knock-down experiments using RNAi showed that reducing PxylGr34 abolished BL-induced feeding inhibition. These results suggest a potential strategy for designing plant hormone-based pest management strategies that target herbivorous insects.
Researchers at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology have visualised the structure of a protein complex essential for transporting cargo within cells. The endoplasmic reticulum is responsible for synthesising and transporting proteins within cells, with the coat protein complex II (COPII) mediating the process that exports the proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum. The complex has two layers; the inner coat, which binds to the membrane and cargo, and the outer coat cage that forms around the vesicle. To transport a range of cargo, the architecture of the COPII coat cage must be flexible, which could not previously be shown by structural data. However, the researchers have used cryo-electron tomography and subtomogram averaging to determine the complete structure of the coat, revealing a novel arrangement of the outer coat and assembly into regular lattices, which explain how the subunits interact with one another and the membrane to mediate and regulate packaging of vesicles of different sizes, from spheres to large tubular carriers.
This study visualizes the behavior of individual endothelial cells (ECs) in response to angiogenic cues during sprouting angiogenesis in zebrafish. Using genetically encoded fluorescent Ca2+ monitoring probes, the study visualizes intracellular Ca2+ dynamics in ECs at a single-cell resolution and finds that intracellular Ca2+ oscillations occur in ECs exhibiting angiogenic behavior. Ca2+ oscillations depend upon VEGF receptor-2 (Vegfr2) and Vegfr3 in ECs budding from the dorsal aorta (DA) and posterior cardinal vein, respectively. The study investigates how Dll4/Notch signaling regulates endothelial Ca2+ oscillations and finds that it is required for the selection of single stalk cell as well as tip cell. The study concludes by suggesting that the findings reveal a precise mechanism for monitoring EC responses to angiogenic cues.
This article discusses the importance of neutralizing antibodies in protecting against SARS-CoV-2 and the potential for the virus to evolve to evade neutralizing antibodies. The article describes experiments using a chimeric virus to generate SARS-CoV-2 variants that are resistant to monoclonal antibodies or convalescent plasma. The results show that resistance mutations can be generated in vitro and are present at low frequencies in natural populations. The article also discusses the potential use of antibody combinations to mitigate the emergence of antibody-resistant SARS-CoV-2 variants.
The gut microbiota of domesticated animals has been impacted by changes in diet, environment, and social interactions, which are similar to the ecological changes experienced by humans during industrialization. Domesticated animals have less diverse diets, expend less energy, live in static and high-density groups, and are subject to medical interventions, which impact their gut microbiota. The gut microbiota of domesticated animals differs from their wild counterparts and may exhibit convergent characteristics in a microbial counterpart to the physiological domestication syndrome. Industrialized, agrarian, and foraging human populations also differ in numerous ecological dimensions, which have resulted in large shifts in the gut microbiota that have been implicated in the rise of various metabolic and immunological diseases. Domesticated animals may provide a useful model for studying the microbially mediated health impacts of rapid environmental change.
Whole cell vaccines for pneumococcal infections could offer protection against a wider variety of strains than current capsule-based vaccines, according to a study using longitudinally-sampled sera from a phase I trial. The trial involved 42 healthy US adults receiving saline injections or varying doses of pneumococcal whole cell vaccine at 28-day intervals. Antibody responses to the vaccine across the cohorts were found to be consistent, and have the potential to provide species-wide immunity. The next step is a phase IIb trial to examine vaccine efficacy. Pneumococci can cause pneumonia, bacteraemia and meningitis, and currently used conjugate vaccines offer limited protection against the disease.
Mutation rates can change considerably over short evolutionary timescales, resulting in differences in mutational spectra among species, human continental groups and even closely related populations. Germline mutations are responsible for both genetic load and inherited disease, so the ability to map mutational modifiers could lead to significant advances in disease prevention and treatment. While selection has limited ability to fine-tune the efficacy of individual genes involved in DNA proofreading and repair, signatures of mutational shifts can be caused by genetic modifiers and nongenetic factors such as chemical mutagens, UV damage, or guanine oxidation. The increased TCC→TTC mutation rate in Europeans may be due to the appearance, drift, and ultimate elimination of a genetic modifier of mutation rate. Differences in mutational spectra among human populations can be attributed to scope for modifiers of mutation rates to segregate, selection limitations in recombining organisms, and individual gene specialisation.
Chronic hepatitis C (cHCV) infection can cause dysregulation of the preimmune repertoire of naïve CD8+ T cells, leading to an increased proportion of memory-phenotype inexperienced cells. This alters the T cell repertoire of cHCV patients, resulting in TCR hyperactivation and generation of potent CD8+ T cell responses. However, successful viral clearance after therapy can lead to a reversion towards a healthy naïve T cell repertoire within two years. The study highlights the added benefit of early viral clearance in patients with chronic HCV infection.
The study examines how the Nodal morphogen gradient induces unique gene expression patterns during zebrafish embryogenesis. The study found that the timing and magnitude of target gene expression can affect the range of expression and diversify the response to morphogen gradients. The study also showed that the Smad2 transcriptional regulator is an essential transducer of Nodal signaling during mesendoderm specification. The study used stable transgenic lines to track GFP-Smad2 nuclear accumulation at the single cell level over time and space to observe the dynamics of the Nodal signaling pathway in vivo.
Chemokine receptors control a range of biological processes, and the same receptor can direct different-cellular responses, but it is not known how this occurs. Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science found that the specific response to chemokine signalling when using different chemokine receptors in embryonic development in zebrafish is dictated by each cell’s own chemokine receptor signal interpretation module, rather than by chemokine receptor-specific signals. Different cell types express specific response modules that interpret generic signals provided by different types of chemokine receptors.
Scientists have developed an open-source software called BIRDS that maps and analyzes 3D microscopy data, with a focus on the mouse brain. The software includes an adaptive bi-channel registration algorithm, automatic annotation, and high-resolution visualization, as well as expandable quantitative analysis. The platform combines registration with neural networks to provide training data for network construction and efficient segmentation of incomplete/defective brain data. BIRDS aims to enable either minute-timescale registration-based segmentation of cross-modality, whole-brain datasets or real-time inference-based image segmentation of various brain regions of interest. The software is optimized to facilitate a standardized and automated computational pipeline to map, analyze, visualize, and share brain data, as well as to create a standard atlas for whole-brain datasets.
The hippocampus is involved in both spatial navigation and memory processing, and its activity is characterized by theta and gamma oscillations. Theta and gamma oscillations are generated by different rhythm generators in multiple layers of the hippocampus, and their interactions are not well understood. The authors used electrophysiological recordings and source separation techniques to separate three different theta and gamma current generators in the hippocampus of rats. They found that different theta oscillations may represent different theta-gamma coding frameworks and proposed a mechanism for segregating or integrating hippocampal computations based on the flexible coordination of different theta frameworks. They also found that gamma oscillations were associated with specific theta generators, and the strength of theta-gamma coupling predicted the synchronization between theta generators. Finally, they investigated the functional role of these theta-gamma frameworks for contextual learning and found that both theta-gamma cross-frequency coupling (CFC) and the coordination between theta oscillations were consistently higher during mismatch novelty and memory-guided decisions. They conclude that their findings support the use of multichannel recordings and source separation tools to investigate interactions between theta and gamma current generators in multiple layers of the hippocampal formation.
The document discusses the process of gastrulation in amniote embryos (reptiles, birds, mammals), which forms three layers of cells from a single sheet through large scale cell movements. The fields of both cellular and molecular mechanisms of these events in embryos are still poorly understood. The study using chick showed isolated EMT events and ingression of individual cells start before gastrulation; a Nodal-dependent ‘community effect’ then concentrates and amplifies EMT by positive feedback to form the primitive streak (PS) which serves as the gateway for gastrulation; and computer simulations show that a combination of local cell interactions (EMT and cell intercalation) is sufficient to explain PS formation and the associated complex movements globally without the need to invoke long-range signalling. The dynamics of EMT for individual cells, how collective EMT arises, how the PS is maintained as a stable structure despite its continuously changing cellular composition, and how the epiblast preserves its integrity and columnar epithelial organisation during these processes are not well understood.
The yeast multi-stress response TF, Msn2 displays short pulses of nuclear localization with intensity-dependent frequency under glucose limitation, but sustained nuclear localization with intensity-dependent amplitude under oxidative stress. The paper examines the limits on dynamic information transduction of Msn2 to target genes in the amplitude or frequency of its activation dynamics, and how much gene expression information the yeast TF Msn2 can transduce to target genes. The paper finds that information transduction through amplitude and frequency regulation of Msn2 is limited to error-free transduction of signal identity, but not signal intensity information. Cells can improve information transduction capacity by modulating promoter cis-elements, integrating the response of more than one gene, or having multiple copies of the same gene.
Researchers used single particle electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) to analyze the bovine mitochondrial ATP synthase and determine the fold of the a subunit, which suggests a proton translocation path through the FO region involving both the a and b subunits. This supports a Brownian ratchet mechanism for proton-translocation-driven rotation in ATP synthases. The cryo-EM analysis produced seven distinct states of the enzyme showing different modes of bending and twisting in the intact ATP synthase. The research also revealed a remarkable feature not previously seen in cryo-EM maps of ATP synthases. A model for the a subunit was built using constraints from analysis of evolutionary covariance in sequences of the a subunit from different species.
Researchers have made significant discoveries into the development and differentiation of cardiovascular progenitor populations in mice and avian embryos, identifying a novel hemogenic angioblast cell lineage marked by expression of the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5. These progenitors were found to migrate from extra-cardiac mesodermal pockets to clusters of blood and endothelial cells in the endocardium and aorta-gonad-mesonephros region. The study also revealed the existence of a population of endocardial progenitors outside of the classic first and second heart field domains. These findings highlight the potential for regenerative therapies stemming from an improved understanding of the mechanisms governing cardiovascular lineage diversification.
Centrioles are microtubule-based organelles essential for cell division, sensing and motility. In Caenorhabditis elegans, the proteins SAS-5 and SAS-6 are crucial to initiate centriole formation. This study combines biophysical and structural analysis to unveil the architecture of SAS-5 and what role it plays in centriole formation. The research shows that two self-associating domains are necessary to form higher-order oligomers of SAS-5: a trimeric coiled-coil and a novel globular dimeric Implico domain. Moreover, this study shows that large SAS-5 assemblies are necessary for C. elegans centriole formation. Finally, the study reveals that the segment between residues 125-265 contains two independently folded domains and encompasses all the structured elements of SAS-5.
New research by scientists at Stanford University reveals that calcium channel mutations can trigger harmful cell growth. Calcium channels regulate electrical impulses in cells and this new finding presents a fresh target for the development of drugs to better tackle cancer cultures moving forward. Calcium channel blockers are already widely used in cardiovascular medicine, so the potential for the development of such treatments that target cancer is becoming more of a possibility. With minimal research into this area therefore far, the study provides an attractive marker for upcoming research and development.
Aneuploidy, the condition of having an abnormal number of chromosomes, is a common feature of tumor cells and leads to severe developmental defects in all eukaryotic organisms studied. The cellular processes affected by aneuploidy and its role in tumorigenesis are not well understood. This study examines the impact of aneuploidy on the proteome of budding yeast strains and shows that protein levels largely scale with gene copy number, but subunits of multi-protein complexes are notable exceptions. Aneuploidy causes alterations in metabolism and redox homeostasis, resulting in increased levels of reactive oxygen species. The study proposes that the proteomic imbalances caused by an aneuploid karyotype disrupt protein homeostasis, leading to detrimental effects on growth and increased genomic instability. However, the study also identifies a loss-of-function mutation in the gene encoding the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp6 that suppresses the adverse effects of aneuploidy and improves the fitness of aneuploid yeast strains through enhanced proteasomal degradation. The study highlights the importance of proteasomal degradation for aneuploidy tolerance and sheds light on the global consequences of aneuploidy on the proteome.
A study has found that independent neurons can generate sequential representations of an animal's location in the hippocampus, rather than temporally coordinated synaptic interactions within and between cell assemblies. Instead, the study shows that rate and phase coding in independent neurons is sufficient to explain the organisation of CA1 population activity during theta states. These findings suggest that independent neurons can flexibly generate sequential population activity within the duration of a single theta cycle, enabling a flexible global remapping of population activity while maintaining the ability to generate coherent theta sequences in multiple environments. The authors developed a phenomenological model of independent and coordinated place cell activity during navigation to test the independent coding hypothesis. The study also investigated the spatially distributed patterns of spiking activity generated in a CA1 population. The study has led to new and experimentally testable predictions for membrane potential oscillations and place field remapping that distinguish circuit mechanisms underlying theta sequences.
Researchers from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the University of California, Los Angeles have identified the per operon as the primary orchestrator of bimodal growth rate in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC). Employing the “ScanLag” methodology, which detects the co-existence of virulent and non-virulent subpopulations, the research uncovered that the hysteretic memory-switch resulted in a stable co-existence of non-virulent and hyper-virulent subpopulations, even after many generations of growth in non-activating conditions. Further study of the sub-population models could lead to more targeted treatments for antibiotic resistance.
The article discusses the regulation of gene expression in single cells, specifically through transcription factors (TFs) and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) in Caenorhabditis elegans neurons. The researchers used fluorescent reporters to study the alternative splicing of the sad-1 gene, which plays a role in synapse formation and development. They found that different neuron types exhibit different splicing patterns of sad-1, and that a combination of TFs and RBPs are required for proper splicing in the ALM touch-sensing neuron. The TFs ensure appropriate expression of the RBPs, which then directly bind to sad-1 pre-mRNA to mediate exon inclusion. The study also found that different combinations of RBPs can generate similar splicing outcomes in various neurons, demonstrating “phenotypic convergence.” Overall, the findings suggest that neuronal RBPs, like TFs, are regulated in a combinatorial code to shape neuron-specific splicing patterns, and that there is extensive cross-talk between transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory layers.
A study has shown that flickering visual stimuli, limited to a certain area, can induce visual hallucinations in the normal population. The annulus stimuli created simple grey blobs which were able to be studied objectively, and the hallucinations shared multiple mechanisms with sensory perception. The study was able to demonstrate that these hallucinations could be critical to test theories of human consciousness and clinical models of hallucination.
The I domain in adhesins is vital for sporozoite gliding motility, mosquito salivary gland invasion, and mouse infection. The I domain in TRAP can engage with multiple ligands, while aX I domains from human integrins partially restored liver infection. Mutations around the ligand-binding site led to inefficient transmission to the rodent host. The I domain was also seen to be key to adhesins employed by apicomplexan pathogens. Once deposited in the skin during blood meal, sporozoites migrate rapidly to find and enter blood vessels. Within the blood stream, parasites are passively transported to the liver. The CTRP protein in P. is required for invasion of the mosquito midgut by the ookinete. Sporozoites use proteases and active motility to egress from the oocyst into the hemolymph and subsequently enter the salivary glands from where they can be transmitted back to the vertebrate host. Sporozoites express two adhesins with I domains, TRAP and TLP, which are stored in secretory vesicles called micronemes, essential for tissue traversal and cell invasion by Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium spp. Mutations of amino acids within the MIDAS motif of the single I domain in TRAP decreased the capacity of sporozoites to enter salivary glands and liver cells as well as to infect mice. The I domain is poly-specific and permits TRAP to function as an adhesin in both vertebrate and arthropod hosts. TRAP-I and codon-modified TRAP with foreign I domains (MIC2-I, αX-I or αL-I) replaced P. berghei TRAP I domain. TRAP shows the same localization in MIC2-I, αX-I and αL-I midgut sporozoites as in TRAP-I midgut sporozoites. Fluorescence microscopy revealed that indeed sporozoites expressing αX-I can enter salivary glands more efficiently than those expressing αL-I.
The brain relies on sensory cues to help understand the environment around it, but variability in these cues can make perception difficult. For sound localization, the interaural time difference (ITD) is the main cue used by animals such as humans and owls, but the reliability of this cue can vary depending on environmental context. In owls, researchers found that the frequency tuning of space-specific neurons in the midbrain reflects a higher-order feature of the code that captures cue reliability. The neurons are activated across a frequency range where the head filtering yields the most reliable interaural phase differences (IPD) across contexts, demonstrating that the brain is able to take into account the reliability of sensory cues. The researchers suggest that weighting by reliability occurs in sound localization and offer evidence that the brain does just that.
Researchers have discovered a novel lipid-TORC1 signalling pathway that coordinates nutrient and metabolic status with growth and development, advancing our understanding of the physiological roles of monomethyl branched-chain fatty acids (mmBCFAs), ceramides, and TOR. The study found that an mmBCFA-derived sphingolipid, d17iso-glucosylceramide, is a critical metabolite in regulating growth and development in animal models, and the lipid function is mediated by TORC1 and antagonized by the NPRL-2/3 complex in the intestine. The essential lipid function is bypassed by activating TORC1 or inhibiting NPRL-2/3. The results also suggest that the growth-promoting function of d17iso-SPA may be mediated by a more complex sphingolipid derived from it.
Researchers have studied the AFV1, a virus that parasitises hyperthermophilic archaea, which live at temperatures above 80C. The virus is enveloped in a lipid-containing membrane that is half the thickness of bacterial and eukaryotic membranes. The researchers hypothesise that the extreme curvature of the viral capsid causes host membrane lipids that permit “horseshoe” conformations to be selectively recruited into the envelope.

The adult mammalian brain consists mainly of mature neurons, but a limited amount of stem cell-driven neurogenesis persists in postnatal life. Another source of immature neurons in adult brains is cortical layer II, which retains developmentally undifferentiated states in adulthood. This population of cortical immature neurons (cINs) have been systematically studied in 12 diverse mammalian species spanning from small-lissencephalic to large-gyrencephalic brains. While virtually absent in rodents, they are present in the entire neocortex of many other species, with their abundance generally increasing with brain size. The cINs are considered as a potential reservoir of young, plastic neuronal phenotypes, representing a form of slow, delayed neurogenesis. The anatomical distribution and cellular features of these cells have been analyzed in detail across a wide range of mammalian species. The occurrence, distribution, morphology, protein expression profile, maturity/immaturity state, and density of cINs were systematically studied in the cerebral cortex of 80 brains across a phylogenetic diversity of eutherian mammals. Linear density was measured since cINs are arranged in a monolayer-like row within cortical layer II (hosting all DCX+ cells of the cortex), allowing inferences across different mammals. These cells are considered as a potential reservoir of young, plastic neuronal phenotypes, representing a form of slow, delayed neurogenesis if integrated into circuits. There is a heterogeneous distribution of the cells, particularly in the neocortex. The occurrence of these cells is fragmented due to the complexity of systematic studies involving large-sized and wild animal species. Therefore their numbers are hard to predict, but their presence indicates an evolutionary developmental mechanism for plasticity that varies among mammalian species, granting a reservoir of young cells for the cerebral cortex.
Nanobodies - single-domain antibodies of camelid origin - can be generated against the vertebrate nuclear pore complex (NPC) and used in STORM imaging to locate individual NPC proteins with <2 nm epitope-label displacement. By using cysteine-maleimide strategies the authors found that this resulted in less background in fluorescence imaging, preserved epitope recognition and was site-specific. In addition, a rapid epitope-mapping strategy was used via crosslinking mass spectrometry and the introduced ectopic cysteines. The researchers used different anti-nucleoporin nanobodies to purify the major NPC building blocks – each in a single step, with native elution and in excellent quality for structural analysis by electron microscopy. The authors suggest these strategies are applicable to any nanobody and nanobody-target.
The circadian clock in plants is regulated by interlocking negative transcriptional feedback loops composed almost exclusively of transcriptional repressors. However, recent research has shown that a related Myb-like protein, REVEILLE8 (RVE8), is a direct transcriptional activator of EE-containing clock and output genes, challenging previous models of the circadian oscillator. This study identified hundreds of RVE8 target genes, many of which are clock-controlled, showing that RVE8 preferentially regulates evening-phased genes containing an EE promoter sequence. RVE8 is a key regulator within the central system of the circadian clock in plants. These findings suggest that the plant circadian oscillator is a highly interconnected complex network, rather than coupled morning and evening feedback loops as previously thought.
This study compares dopamine activity in different parts of the striatum in mice during classical conditioning. The authors found that dopamine signals in the posterior tail of the striatum (TS dopamine) strongly respond to novel cues, while signals in the ventral striatum (VS dopamine) only respond to cues that have been paired with a reward. Additionally, TS dopamine responds to different types of stimuli while VS dopamine only responds to reward-predicting cues. This suggests that TS dopamine encodes novelty and general salience signals while VS dopamine reliably encodes reward prediction error. The authors used fiber fluorometry to record bulk calcium signals from the axons of midbrain dopamine neurons projecting to the striatum. The study also discusses the advantages of novelty detection and how dopamine neurons encode value and motivational salience. The authors suggest that novelty responses in dopamine neurons may be better considered separately from the reward prediction error framework.
This article discusses the role of cell dynamics and morphogenesis in neural patterning and specification. The study analyses the otic neurogenic domain in zebrafish by combining 4D analysis of cell behaviors with proneural expression quantification. Pioneer cells expressing neurog1 outside the otic epithelium migrate and ingress into the epithelialising placode to become the first otic neuronal progenitors. The neighboring cells subsequently express neurog1 inside the placode, and apical symmetric divisions amplify the specified pool. This study proposes a novel view for otic neurogenesis integrating cell dynamics whereby ingression of pioneer cells instructs neuronal specification. The study has implications for potential developmental defects in neurogenesis, which could result in congenital sensorineural hearing loss in the human inner ear.
Researchers have isolated and characterized a giant virus, Bodo saltans virus (BsV), which infects microzooplankton Bodo saltans. It has a 1.39 Mb genome of which 40% of the open reading frames had no similarities to any other sequences, and included homing endonuclease-encoding self-splicing introns that may defend against competing viruses. BsV is the first isolate of a klosneuvirus, proposed from metagenomic data, and is representative of the most abundant group within the Mimiviridae in the ocean. It also shows extensive gene duplication, indicating ongoing evolutionary arms race and underlining the rapid evolution and genomic plasticity that has led to genome gigantism and the enigma that is giant viruses.
Granule cell progenitors (GCPs) in the cerebellum proliferate extensively in the external granule layer (EGL) before differentiating and migrating. The precise timing of cell cycle withdrawal is important for the normal development and final size of the cerebellum. The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), a receptor known for its role in neuronal apoptosis following injury, is highly expressed in proliferating GCPs, but downregulated once the cells leave the cell cycle. This study demonstrates a novel role for p75NTR in regulating proper cell cycle exit of neuronal progenitors in the developing cerebellum, stimulated by proNT3, which partially opposes sonic hedgehog-induced proliferation. In the absence of p75NTR, GCPs continue to proliferate beyond their normal period, resulting in a larger cerebellum that persists into adulthood and compromises motor/balance function. These results reveal a novel role for p75NTR in developing neuronal progenitors and suggest it may regulate the transition of GCPs from a proliferating to a migrating population.
Researchers have published a comprehensive study on the way in which branches of the human gene regulatory system interact, enabling the integration of several signals in order to control complex cellular processes. The study focused on members of the bZIP family of transcription factors, which form extensive networks by binding DNA in various combinations. This permits the targeting of a narrow group of regulatory sites on the genome. The study used fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments and DNA binding sequence specificity analyses to characterise the interactions between 270 pairs of human bZIP proteins, which can form over 1,400 distinct dimers.
The protein SOX2 plays a key role in maintaining the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Post-translational modifications (PTMs
Transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) is an innate immunity mechanism that plants use to protect against DNA viruses, such as the Geminivirus. The Geminivirus, however, encode for a transcriptional activation protein (TrAP) which suppresses TGS, allowing the virus to infect the plant. The study found that TrAP targets an Arabidopsis histone methyltransferase called KYP, which catalyses H3K9me2, an important repressive mark, and is responsible for initiating TGS. When TrAP was expressed in Arabidopsis, it resulted in developmental anomalies resembling TGS mutants, and the loss of the repressive H3K9me2 mark. The study concludes that TrAP inhibits KYP activity to counter host defense, and thus provides insight into the host-virus interaction at the epigenetic level.
Researchers have succeeded in defining and measuring the process by which bacteria and other organisms select the position at which transcription starts, according to a paper in the journal Science. RNA polymerase binds to a strand of DNA, creates a single-stranded 'transcription bubble' and then chooses a transcription start site. The precise place chosen depends on the organism’s sequence, and the concentration of initiating-substrate. The research team found that multiple factors influenced start position, including interaction with a particular strand of DNA and concentration of initiating nucleotides. They also found RNA polymerase scrunches and anti-scrunches, and so changes the size of the bubble, depending on the sequence around the start site.
The article evaluates whether genetic loci encoding organelle proteomes contribute to age-related disease pathogenesis. The study focuses on organelles like lysosomes and mitochondria and finds that genetic loci near genes encoding organelles are not enriched for age-related disease risk, except for the nucleus, where enrichment emanates from nuclear transcription factors. The study identifies inherited variation near transcription factors as having an outsize influence on age-related trait risk leading to inherited risk of common age-associated diseases. The article also explores the burden of age-related diseases and the role of genome-wide association studies in discovering robust associations with common genetic variants, shedding light on underlying mechanisms of disease and spotlighting targetable pathways. Finally, the study uses stratified linkage disequilibrium score regression and MAGMA to assess gene-based heritability enrichment accounting for LD and several confounders and finds that there is no evidence of heritability enrichment among MitoCarta genes.
Researchers have used cryo-electron tomography to image fibroblast growth factor FGF21 in human adipocytes. Molecularly defined gold nanoparticles were labeled with FGF21 to enable tracking along the endocytotic pathway. The study showed that most nanoparticles were in pairs on the outer surface of cells and inside cells in coated vesicles and endosomes. Imaging using fluorescence light microscopy has been extended by super-resolution techniques, while advances in cryo-electron microscopy have yielded structures at near atomic resolution. The power of the study using gold nanoparticles can be extended to a wide variety of cargo and may be used for studies of other intracellular transactions.
This study investigates the diversity and potential role of thrombospondin-type-1 repeat (TSR) domain proteins in the mutualistic endosymbiosis between cnidarians and dinoflagellates. The research reveals a large and diverse repertoire of TSR proteins in seven anthozoan species, demonstrating that the TSR domain promotes colonization of the host by the symbiotic dinoflagellate Symbiodinium minutum. Host-microbe interactions are ancient and ubiquitous, and this study provides evidence that these proteins play an important role in the establishment of cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.
The basal ganglia support reinforcement learning by adjusting action values according to reward prediction errors. However, adaptive behavior in stochastic environments requires the consideration of uncertainty to dynamically adjust the learning rate. Cholinergic tonically active interneurons (TANs) may endow the striatum with such a mechanism in computational models. TANs modulate the excitability of spiny neurons, their population response to reinforcement, and hence the effective learning rate. Long TAN pauses facilitated robustness to spurious outcomes by increasing divergence in synaptic weights between neurons coding for alternative action values, whereas short TAN pauses facilitated stochastic behavior but increased responsiveness to change-points in outcome contingencies. A feedback control system allowed TAN pauses to be dynamically modulated by uncertainty across the spiny neuron population, allowing the system to self-tune and optimize performance across stochastic environments.
MiR-146a is a critical regulator of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) homeostasis during chronic inflammation in mice. It is needed to maintain HSC quality and longevity during chronic inflammatory stress, and its deletion produces dysregulated inflammatory hematopoiesis and ultimately leads to HSC exhaustion and hematopoietic neoplasms. MiR-146a is a negative regulator of inflammation and is part of a molecular axis consisting of signaling protein TRAF6, transcriptional factor NF-κB, and cytokine IL-6. Chronic inflammation caused by exposure to bacterial materials leads to HSC deficiency and myeloproliferative disease, resulting in bone marrow failure.
The paper explores the mechanism behind the formation of giant and smaller cells in the Arabidopsis thaliana sepal. The transcription factor, ATML1, is expressed in all epidermal cells, however, its levels fluctuate in each cell. When ATML1 levels reach a certain threshold during the G2 phase of the cell cycle, the cell will enter a state of endoreduplication and become giant, otherwise, the cell divides. The study demonstrates a fluctuation-driven patterning mechanism for cell fate decisions. It also highlights the importance of stochasticity in creating the correct distribution of phenotypes within a population of cells.
The study found that tooth fracture rates among large carnivores can be an indicator of prey availability and competition. Three populations of gray wolves were studied to assess the link between prey availability and tooth fracture rates. It was found that when prey:predator ratios declined, kills were more fully consumed and rates of tooth fracture more than doubled. Large carnivore tooth fracture frequency likely reflects energetic stress, an aspect of predator success that is challenging to quantify in wild populations. Tooth wear and fracture data from Isle Royale National Park, Yellowstone National Park, and Scandinavia were compared with data collected previously from historic populations of 223 North American gray wolf skulls. elevated fracture frequencies usually occurred across the entire tooth row. The high fracture frequencies for Isle Royale and later Yellowstone wolves are associated with a greater percentage of individuals with moderate and heavy tooth wear. Tooth fracture rates also differed by age at death among the three samples with or without canine teeth included.
The CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system has become a popular tool for gene regulation and genome editing in eukaryotic cells, but its ability to work within eukaryotic chromatin has so far been poorly understood. A recent study has investigated how nucleosomes, the smallest units of chromatin, might affect Cas9's activity. The study found that nucleosomes assembled on native DNA sequences allow Cas9 action to some extent, but accessibility to nucleosomal DNA is highly dependent on the properties of the DNA sequence and the distance of the PAM site from the nucleosome dyad. The study has also found that chromatin remodeling enzymes can improve the Cas9's activity on nucleosomal templates. The findings provide some explanation for Cas9's efficacy in eukaryotic cells.
The multi-domain splicing factor RBM5 regulates alternative splicing of the apoptosis-control genes FAS/CD95, Caspase-2, and AID through its OCRE domain, which mediates interactions with the spliceosomal SmN/B/B’ proteins. The OCRE domain adopts a unique β-sheet fold and directly binds to the proline-rich C-terminal tail of the SmN/B/B’ proteins. The OCRE-SmN peptide complex reveals a specific recognition of poly-proline helical motifs in SmN/B/B’. Mutations of conserved aromatic residues impair binding to the Sm proteins in vitro and compromise RBM5-mediated alternative splicing regulation of FAS/CD95. RBM5 OCRE represents a poly-proline recognition domain that mediates critical interactions with the C-terminal tail of the spliceosomal SmN/B/B’ proteins in FAS/CD95 alternative splicing regulation.
The increased coupling between spindle and ripple oscillations in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and hippocampus is believed to underlie memory consolidation, but it's unclear if this increase is necessary for successful memory consolidation. To test this hypothesis, researchers chemogenetically inhibited parvalbumin-positive (PV+) interneurons in either the CA1 region of the hippocampus or mPFC. They found that inhibition of PV+ cells prevented the after-learning increase in ripple-spindle coupling and suppressed contextual fear memory consolidation. These findings suggest that PV+ cells are crucial in enhancing hippocampal-neocortical communication following memory consolidation, and that the increased ripple-spindle coupling induced by learning requires the activity of PV+ cells.
Spinel embryonic development in spiders is regulated by BMP signaling via a mesenchymal cell structure called the cumulus. The transcription factor Pt-Ets4 is necessary for cumulus integrity and dorsoventral patterning. Knockdown of this gene leads to defects in cumulus migration and dorsal patterning, resulting in radially symmetric and ventralized embryos. Researchers studied the formation of the cumulus, and found that Pt-Ets4 is expressed during the formation of the center of the germ-disc in the cluster of cells that become cumulus cells. Ectopic expression of Pt-Ets4 induces cell delamination and migration, resulting in a mesoderm-like cell fate. Pt-Ets4 is needed for activating Pt-hunchback and Pt-twist expression.
Cardiac neural crest cells are a stem cell population that contributes to the cardiovascular system, and they may have the potential to repair heart damage in vertebrates. Researchers used avian retroviruses and Wnt1-Cre lineage analysis to uncover a previously undescribed neural crest contribution to cardiomyocytes of the ventricles in Gallus gallus (chickens) and mice. They also examined adult heart regeneration in the neural crest transgenic line Tg (-4.9sox10:eGFP) in Danio rerio (zebrafish) and found that sox10 and other neural crest regulatory network genes are upregulated in the regenerating myocardium after resection. Their results suggest that neural crest cells contribute to many cardiovascular structures, including cardiomyocytes across vertebrates, and may play a role in heart regeneration.
The Drosophila midgut contains multiple subregions that differ in cell morphology, physiology, and gene expression, suggesting distinctive functions. Intestinal stem cells vary in behavior and gene expression regionally, indicating that they contribute to sub-specialization. The clonal analysis showed that stem cells generate progeny located outside their own subregion at only one of six borders tested, suggesting that midgut subregions resemble cellular compartments involved in tissue development. Tumors generated by disrupting Notch signaling arose preferentially in three subregions and tumor cells also appeared to respect regional borders. The regional stem cell differences likely influence tumorigenesis. The research is done to understand the ‘steady state’ gut before analyzing the more complex situations where the gut is changing its structure. RNAseq analysis of the midgut subregions validates that the specific regions have isolated free of significant cross-contamination and revealed a much greater level of regionalized gene expression than previously thought.
A study has used ribosome profiling to discover two distinct translational programs that occur during mitosis. The study found a modest (around 35%) global translational repression of the bulk of mRNAs in mitosis and one subset of mRNA that was not repressed, but subject to gene-specific regulation. Most mRNAs showed altered translation rates in mitosis when compared to either G1 or S phase cells, and nearly all the mRNAs that were differentially translated in mitosis vs. G2 were also differentially translated in mitosis vs. G1, which indicates that the translational effects are largely mitosis-specific rather than reflecting cell cycle modulation of mRNA levels. Genome-wide studies give more insights about translational regulation, which might complement the post-translational mechanisms for inactivating protein function.
The regulation of cell wall assembly is crucial for bacterial survival and contributes to pathogenesis and antibiotic tolerance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). However, little is known about how the cell wall is regulated in stress. The protein CwlM is homologous to peptidoglycan amidases, which coordinate peptidoglycan synthesis with nutrient availability. CwlM is sequestered from peptidoglycan by localization in the cytoplasm, and its enzymatic function is not essential. CwlM is phosphorylated and associates with MurA, the first enzyme in PG precursor synthesis. Phosphorylated CwlM activates MurA approx. 30-fold. CwlM is dephosphorylated during starvation, resulting in decreased activity of MurA, decreased cell wall metabolism, and increased tolerance to multiple antibiotics. CwlM is essential for cell survival and elongation in Msmeg, but its enzymatic activity is not required. CwlM may have a different function. A proteomic screen in Mtb found that CwlMTB is phosphorylated.


 

Researchers have revealed how proximal T cell signalling modulates Notch activation by a spatiotemporally constrained mechanism through a protein kinase, PKCθ. PKCθ is a mediator of signalling by the T cell antigen receptor and the principal costimulatory receptor CD28. The study demonstrates that PKCθ selectively inactivates the negative regulator of F-actin generation, Coronin 1A, at the centre of the T cell interface with the antigen-presenting cell (APC), allowing for effective generation of the large actin-based lamellum required for recruitment of the Notch-processing membrane metalloproteinase ADAM10.
Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is a primary mechanism of calcium influx in cells following depletion of endoplasmic reticulum calcium stores. Calcium release activated calcium (CRAC) channels are responsible for SOCE, with Orai1 forming the pore subunit of CRAC channels and Stim1 functioning as the endoplasmic reticulum resident Ca2+ sensor. However, the molecular steps enabling activation of SOCE via CRAC channel clusters remain incompletely defined. This study identifies an essential role of α-SNAP in mediating functional coupling of Stim1 and Orai1 molecules to activate SOCE. α-SNAP is found to directly bind Stim1 and Orai1 to regulate the function and molecular composition of Stim1-Orai1 clusters that form the CRAC channel complex. This role for α-SNAP in SOCE is independent of its conventional role in facilitating NSF mediated SNARE complex disassembly. The study shows that α-SNAP is a novel regulator of SOCE and downstream signaling required for NFAT activation.
The brain has the ability to adapt after injury through neural plasticity, but there is little information about when and where plasticity occurs. This study investigated the time-course and predictability of plasticity after hippocampal lesions in monkeys using MRI scans. The study found that plasticity is highly dynamic but predictable based on pre-lesion functional connectivity, cell density gradients, and pre-lesion network structure. The study also suggests that predicting areas that will undergo functional disconnection and identifying potential avenues for guiding adaptive plasticity is important. The study demonstrates the relationship between pre-lesion functional connectivity and the dynamic course of plasticity following a lesion, showing that information across a range of spatial scales can aid in prediction of the plastic recovery process.
Researchers have developed a method to simultaneously monitor axonal ATP levels and electrical activity in myelinated axons, creating a new tool to study neuronal and glial energy metabolism. The researchers used transgenic expression of an ATP sensor in neurons of mice with confocal FRET imaging and electrophysiological recordings of acutely isolated optic nerves to monitor dynamic changes and activity-dependent axonal ATP homeostasis at the cellular level and in real time. The research found that changes in ATP levels correlate well with compound action potentials but that axonal glycolysis products are not sufficient to maintain mitochondrial energy metabolism of electrically active axons.
Researchers have identified a mechanism by which cells defend against misfolded proteins linked to neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The study found that mutations in the gene encoding Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) all cause ALS, and that cells defend against the toxicity by exporting misfolded SOD1 to the cytoplasm via the nuclear export carrier protein CRM1. A novel nuclear export signal (NES)-like sequence was identified that was usually buried but exposed during SOD1 misfolding, allowing CRM1 to recognise and remove the misfolded protein. The findings could lead to the development of new therapeutic approaches to treating ALS and other neurodegenerative conditions.
A new study has revealed that a mutated protein called low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) increases the risk of developing atherosclerosis, a chronic condition which leads to heart attacks and strokes. LRP1 controls
An orphan TBP-associated factor called TAF9B has been found to be selectively up-regulated in motor neuron differentiation and is required for the transcriptional induction of specific neuronal genes, while being dispensable for global gene expression in murine ES cells. TAF9B is also found to bind to both promoters and distal enhancers of neuronal genes, partially co-localizing at binding sites of OLIG2, a key activator of motor neuron differentiation. Elsewhere in the text it is noted that the absence of TAF9B does not affect expression of pluripotency markers, suggesting that it is dispensable for global gene expression and pluripotency of murine ES cells.
A new study published in the journal, Nature, reveals how gene transcription can be activated by decreasing RNA polymerase II pausing in the promoter-proximal region. For humans, transcription of a protein-coding gene of average length takes a minimum of half an hour. The ‘pause-initiation limit’ limits the productive frequency of transcription initiation in human cells. A kinetic model of transcription suggested that pause duration delimits the initiation frequency and suggested that paused Pol II sterically interferes with initiation. The researchers concluded that the duration of pausing can control transcription initiation at human genes, and derived determinants for CDK9-dependent pause release and initiation activation. The study also demonstrates that CDK9 stimulates the release of paused polymerase and activates transcription by increasing the number of transcribing polymerases and thus the amount of mRNA synthesised per time.
A study has found evidence that rodents, specifically rats, have a ventral-like, object-processing pathway in their visual cortex which can support transformation-tolerant recognition of visual objects. The study investigated how neurons located along the progression of extrastriate areas that run laterally to primary visual cortex encode object information. The findings suggest that the rodent brain has a progressive functional specialization of neural responses along these areas, with a reduction of low-level visual information and an increase in the ability to support visual object discrimination under identity-preserving transformations. The study used information theory to quantify the relative sensitivity of neurons to stimulus luminance and higher-level features. This research may provide a promising model for investigating neuronal circuitry underlying recognition of visual objects.
Dopamine neurons in monkeys acquire value signals that represent an economic decision variable based on the frequency of experienced rewards, according to new research. The studies indicate that individuals learn the value of cues predicting probabilistic rewards from experienced outcomes, while both dopaminergic and striatal feedback reflects the probability of such cues. Flexibility and speed of the signal provide increased decision-making efficiency, and acquisition of reward prediction errors reflects the acquisition of probability-dependent value responses. The research was conducted on monkeys during experimental Pavlovian learning tasks.
Antifreeze proteins (AFPs) protect cold-adapted organisms from freezing to death by selectively adsorbing to internal ice crystals and inhibiting ice propagation. AFPs have evolved independently numerous times to bind stereo-selectively to ice in various orientations, resulting in a structurally diverse protein family. The molecular details of AFP adsorption-inhibition are uncertain but are proposed to involve the Gibbs–Thomson effect. Despite a wide selection of available structural and experimental data, a complete molecular description of how an AFP binds to its respective ice planes and inhibits crystal growth remains elusive. Computer simulations have played a crucial role in expanding our understanding of the AFP phenomena. Here we show by using unbiased molecular dynamics simulations a protein structure-function mechanism for the spruce budworm Choristoneura fumiferana AFP, including stereo-specific binding and consequential melting and freezing inhibition.
Perforin-2 is a pore-forming protein that is constitutively expressed in phagocytes and inducibly expressed in tissue-forming cells. It is known to prevent the intracellular replication and proliferation of bacterial pathogens in vitro, and Perforin-2 knockout mice are unable to control systemic dissemination of MRSA or Salmonella typhimurium. Perforin-2 polymerizes to form clusters of 100 Å pores
The functional communication of neurons in cortical networks plays a key role in higher cognitive processes such as perception, movement and cognition. However, little is known about the organization of single neuron networks and their relationship to the synchronization processes that are critical for their formation. A recent study investigated the functional single neuron network in three fronto-parietal areas of the primate grasping circuit during active behavior of macaque monkeys. The study found that the network was closely connected (small-world) and consisted of functional modules that spanned these areas. The network also had highly heterogeneous importance of different neurons, with a small number of neurons contributing strongly to the network function (hubs) which were in turn strongly interconnected (rich-club). Furthermore, the rich-club hub neurons spiked and communicated by oscillatory synchrony in the beta and low frequency range, while the remainder of the network predominantly communicated by non-oscillatory synchrony. The study highlights the importance of oscillatory synchrony as a central coordination mechanism for functional network topology.
The study investigated how natural changes in light intensity impact the expression of circadian-clock-controlled genes in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus. The authors found that natural changes in light significantly affect the expression of hundreds of circadian-clock-controlled genes and that the regulation of RNA polymerase recruitment to promoters by a network of transcription factors including RpaA and RpaB plays a key role. The authors also describe a complex regulatory network underlying circadian gene expression in natural conditions and demonstrate that phenomenological models effectively describe the integration of the circadian clock with responses to environmental fluctuations.
Scientists have developed Codetta, a computational method that can predict amino acid decoding of each codon from nucleotide sequence data. It was used to survey the genetic code usage of over 250,000 bacterial and archaeal genome sequences in GenBank and discovered five new reassignments of arginine codons, representing the first sense codon changes in bacteria. The method can analyze sequences from all domains of life, including bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes, organelles, and viruses, and the ability to confidently predict codon decodings depends on having protein-coding regions with recognizable homology. The study sheds light on how alternative genetic codes evolve and how a new codon meaning can evolve without disrupting the translation of most proteins.
The article discusses how brainstem and cerebellar neurons process self-motion estimation during active and passive movements. The authors suggest that a single sensory internal model can combine motor commands with vestibular and proprioceptive signals optimally, and that the sensory cues and internal model are both engaged and critically important for accurate self-motion estimation during active head movements. The authors propose a Kalman filter that incorporates motor commands into a previously established model of optimal passive self-motion estimation, matching experimentally measured neuronal responses during active and passive head and trunk rotations and translations. The article also discusses how previous research has studied vestibular function using passive motion stimuli, and how new research is starting to make suggestions that the brain predicts how self-generated motion activates the vestibular organs and subtracts these predictions from afferent signals to generate sensory prediction errors. The article provides a detailed explanation of the Kalman filter model and how it performs optimal estimation of self-motion using motor commands and vestibular sensory signals in a series of increasingly complex simulations.
A study has found that the changes in adipocyte gene expression caused by consumption of a high-fat diet include alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Specifically, NOVA splicing proteins are associated with part of the alternative splicing program. Further studies found that NOVA proteins mediate a splicing program that suppresses adipose tissue thermogenesis, indicating their contribution to the regulation of adipose tissue function and the maintenance of normal glycemia. The study sheds light on the potential of alternative pre-mRNA splicing for cellular differentiation and the development of new therapies, especially the regulation of adipocyte biology.
Researchers have solved the structure of double-knot toxin (DkTx), a tarantula toxin that activates the TRPV1 ion channel that detects noxious heat, providing improved structures of TRPV1 with and without the toxin bound, and investigating the interactions of DkTx with the channel and membranes. They found that DkTx binds to the outer edge of the external pore of TRPV1 in a counterclockwise configuration and inserts hydrophobic residues into the bilayer surrounding it. They also discovered that DkTx partitions naturally into membranes in opposing energetics for membrane partitioning and channel activation, and the toxin disrupts hydrophobic residues behind the selectivity filter that are critical for channel activation. The study offers novel modes of toxin-channel recognition, and revelatory insights into the mechanism of thermosensation.
Adolescents have a greater susceptibility to nicotine and are more likely to initiate tobacco use. A study has found that reduced activity of the translation initiation factor eIF2α underlies the hypersensitivity of adolescent mice to the effects of cocaine. The same factor has been found to regulate synaptic actions of nicotine in mice and humans, highlighting its potential as a common regulator of drug-induced synaptic potentiation and behaviour. Tobacco use is a significant global health problem with enormous economic and social costs, remaining the leading cause of preventable death worldwide. Adolescents are particularly at risk, with a vast majority of smokers beginning at age 18 or younger. The study also identified a functional genetic variation in the promoter of the Eif2s1 gene encoding eIF2α that alters brain responses to rewarding stimuli in human tobacco smokers.
Researchers have developed a photoactivation method that targets specific subcellular locations, enabling the release of sphingosine inside mitochondria in living cells. This allowed for the monitoring of sphingosine metabolism by lipidomics, revealing distinct metabolic patterns and signaling functions depending on the subcellular location. The technique provides direct evidence that sphingolipid metabolism and signaling are dependent on subcellular location, offering new possibilities for studying the effects of lipid localization on signaling and metabolic fate. Aberrant sphingolipid levels are linked to a broad range of diseases, making this research a significant development in the understanding of lipid metabolism and signaling.
A new study has found that serotonin levels are essential for cognitive flexibility - the brain's ability to switch between different tasks. The research found that the chemical helped animals to inhibit responses that were no longer relevant and to promote plasticity that enabled them to adapt to a new environment. The study used photometry to monitor the activity of dorsal raphe serotonin neurons in mice. The findings showed that these neurons were activated by positive and negative prediction errors, and could explain the importance of serotonin in inhibiting perseverative responding.
Researchers have found a new way in which human epithelial cells, a type of cell lining the body's surfaces, eat other cells, identified as entosis. Cells typically undergo entosis after losing matrix adhesion, but researchers found that the process could be driven by mitosis. The process, which is called mitotic entosis and is controlled by Cdc42, opens up intriguing possibilities for cancer treatment as the drug Paclitaxel promotes mitotic rounding and entosis. Entosis is prevalent in cancer, and prior research suggested it was used as a means of promoting survival within the tumour microenvironment.
Researchers have discovered a new variant of a gene, UBQLN4, that is linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - also known as motor neurone disease. The variant, called D90A, was shown in laboratory tests to impair normal motor neuron function by compromising their morphology. It also impairs proteasomal function which leads to the accumulation of beta-catenin, another protein, and the resultant abnormal motor neurons. This discovery could help develop future treatments for ALS.
Scientists have developed a new synthetic technology for detecting DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are responsible for genomic changes that promote cancer and evolution. The technology uses fluorescent-protein fusions of the double-strand DNA end-binding protein, Gam of bacteriophage Mu, to pinpoint the subgenomic locations of DSBs. The data provided by this technology allow direct quantification of the number of DSBs per cell, and illustrates the versatility of fluorescent-Gam for interrogation of DSBs in living cells. The technology reveals that spontaneous DSBs occur mostly one per cell, and correspond with generations, supporting replicative models for spontaneous breakage. It also demonstrates directly that some spontaneous DSBs occur outside of S phase in mammalian cells. The data helps illuminate spontaneous DNA breakage in both E. coli and human cells.
The study found that synaptotagmin 1 plays a crucial role in the coupling of synaptic vesicle exocytosis and the membrane association/disassociation cycle of Rab3. In the absence of calcium, synaptotagmin 1 inhibits the GTP hydrolysis of Rab3 protein, which is important in activity-dependent recruitment of synaptic vesicles. When calcium is present, synaptotagmin 1 promotes a disassociation of Rab3 from the membrane. The study also found that loss of snt-1 function leads to the diffuse distribution of Rab-3::GFP phenotype in neurons, suggesting SNT-1 is crucial for localization of RAB-3 on synaptic vesicles. However, this does not affect synaptic vesicle clustering. The punctate distribution pattern of GFP::RAB-3 has been observed in wild-type animals while a diffuse distribution pattern is present when the animal is deficient in SNT-1. Also, snt-1 unc-104 double mutants have a similar phenotype to snt-1 mutants again suggesting that the role of synaptotagmin 1 in the Rab3 cycle is unaffected by SV clustering.
The speed at which synaptic vesicles are retrieved plays an important role in the efficiency of neural circuits. Researchers have discovered that the speed of endocytosis - the process by which the vesicles are retrieved - is dependent on calcium levels and the number of action potentials fired. At physiological temperature, endocytosis speeds up for the first 15-25 action potential bursts before slowing down, creating an optimised rate of retrieval. Calcium modulation of endocytosis, which has long been known to be a significant factor, occurs via the dephosphorylation of dynamin 1.
This study used camera trapping and remote sensing data to examine the factors that affect the spatial distribution of large herbivores in the Białowieża Forest in Poland. The study found that the variation in the spatial distribution of large herbivores (including ungulates) is affected by species-specific responses to environmental bottom-up and biotic top-down factors, as well as human-induced effects. The study also identified functionally distinct landscape-scale herbivory regimes that could be an important mechanism creating spatial variation in herbivory that maintains vegetation heterogeneity. The study also highlights the need to consider the cascading effects of humans and large carnivores on herbivore communities and their impact within the landscape. Overall, the study aims to provide insights into the structural and functional role of herbivores in increasingly human-affected ecosystems.
The study describes the use of NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations to determine the structure of a low-population intermediate in the product release process by human lysozyme. The intermediate is associated with the product release in an enzymatic reaction and is facilitated by conformational fluctuations that create low-population intermediate states that make the release process easier. The study provides a valid structure by identifying a distinctive structural characteristic of this state, a transient hydrogen bond. The results illustrate how the presence of a metastable intermediate with weak interactions between the enzyme and product can facilitate product release by an enzyme. The study provides valuable information for investigating the third step in the enzymatic catalysis process.
Multipartite viruses, which have a segmented genome, challenge the classical conceptual framework in virology that the spatial unit of viral replication is an individual cell. A study on the highly multipartite faba bean necrotic stunt virus (FBNSV) with eight genome segments shows that the distinct segments rarely co-occur within individual cells. Instead, distinct segments accumulate independently in different cells and the viral system is functional through complementation across cells. Thus, FBNSV defines a viral multicellular way of life that can only sustain a productive infection at a multicellular tissue level. The study proposes that the different parts of the viral genome can complement across distinct neighboring cells.
This study investigates how nucleosome remodeling, by the chromatin remodeler proteins ISW1a and SWI/SNF, can influence the position of transcription factors bound to DNA. The study found that SWI/SNF was able to slide a nucleosome past a bound transcription factor, resulting in eviction of the transcription factor from the DNA, while ISW1a was blocked by the transcription factor and unable to reposition the nucleosome. The study demonstrates a novel mechanism for regulation of transcription through the interplay between nucleosome positioning and transcription factor binding. The study employed a single molecule assay using a DNA unzipping technique to determine the precise locations of the nucleosome and transcription factors.
The study investigates the mechanism and implications of G2 arrest in progenitors of the adult thoracic tracheal epithelium in Drosophila. The tracheoblasts pause in G2 for around 48-56 hours and grow in size during this period. The mechanism for G2-M is highly conserved amongst eukaryotic cells. The G2-M transition in tracheoblasts is negatively regulated by ATR/Chk1 and arrest in G2 facilitates cellular and organ growth. The cells in Tr2 DT complete S phase in L1 and remain in G2 from late L1/L2 till 24-32 h L3. The FUCCI system monitors precise cell cycle staging based on the levels of fluorescent reporters. Cells in Tr2 enter larval life in G1, transition from G1 to G2 in the first larval instar (L1), and remain paused in G2 from the second larval instar (L2) till 24-32 h L3 (around 48-56 hours). While G2 arrest in sensory organ progenitors is mediated by the transcriptional repression of Stg, it seems that this is not the case for tracheoblasts. The study concludes that ATR/Chk1 negatively regulate G2-M in developing tracheoblasts, and G2 arrest facilitates cellular and hypertrophic organ growth.
This article explores the effects of the biofilm lifestyle on the evolution of antibiotic resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii populations. The researchers conducted experimental evolution and whole genome sequencing to test the effects of biofilm and well-mixed environments on resistance to ciprofloxacin. They found that biofilm populations developed collateral sensitivity to cephalosporins and that the identities of mutations and evolutionary dynamics differed between lifestyle. The study sheds light on the ways that pathogens adapt to antibiotics while growing in biofilms and has implications for treatment decisions.
Membralin is a protein that was previously of unknown function. This study shows that membralin is critical for motor neuron survival and its deficiency results in early-onset motor neuron disease. This is due to an interaction between membralin and a protein called Erlin2, which is important for the degradation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The degradation rate of ER-associated proteins is attenuated in cells lacking membralin, leading to increased ER stress and neuronal vulnerability. Drug targets for motor neuron diseases may be aimed at ER stress-related molecules. The study suggests that membralin plays a crucial role in motor neuron survival and may offer a novel target for therapy.
Researchers have investigated the role of carbon dioxide (CO2) in plant-herbivore interactions using molecular manipulative approaches. They identified DvvGr2 as the essential gene for CO2 perception in Diabrotica virgifera virgifera (western corn rootworm larvae) and studied how CO2 perception impacts their interaction with maize (host plant). WCR larvae are attracted to CO2-enriched environments within the physiological range of maize rhizosphere and use CO2 as a distance-dependent host location cue. CO2 production and release from maize roots and root-associated microorganisms are associated with the presence of maize roots, making CO2 a reliable host location cue for root herbivores.
The formation of the dorsal-ventral axis during vertebrate embryogenesis is controlled by the BMP/Chordin activator/inhibitor system. Several theories have been proposed to explain how BMP and Chordin distributions are regulated to achieve patterning. This study directly tests five of these models by measuring the biophysical properties of fluorescently tagged BMP2b and Chordin in zebrafish embryos. The findings challenge current self-regulating reaction-diffusion and shuttling models, and provide support for a graded source-sink mechanism underlying zebrafish dorsal-ventral patterning. BMP and Chordin are found to diffuse and rapidly form extracellular protein gradients, and Chordin does not modulate the diffusivity or distribution of BMP2b. Additionally, BMP2b and Chordin proteins have similar stabilities. BMP signaling activity is imaged in pSmad1/5/9-immunostained zebrafish embryos, and the kinetics of BMP and Chordin protein gradient formation are measured. The study provides evidence in support of the 'Graded source-sink + mobile BMP model' as the most consistent model for dorsal-ventral patterning in zebrafish embryogenesis.
The study investigated the role of DNA methylation in gene regulation, by analyzing genetic variation, DNA methylation and transcriptome sequencing data from three different cell types of the GenCord human population cohort. The study found that the association between DNA methylation and gene expression variation among individuals was likely due to different mechanisms from those establishing methylation-expression patterns during differentiation. Furthermore, cell-type differential DNA methylation may delineate a platform in which local inter-individual changes may respond to or act in gene regulation. The study also showed that unlike genetic regulatory variation, DNA methylation alone does not significantly drive allele-specific expression. The study provided novel insights into the mechanistic relationships between genetic variation, DNA methylation and transcriptome sequencing data in different cell types.
The organ of Corti in the inner ear contains sensory and supporting cells, and the number of sensory progenitors that give rise to these cells is regulated during development, affecting the length of the cochlea. Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs) have different roles during inner ear development
The hippocampus is a part of the brain that is responsible for spatial cognition. Place cells in the hippocampus were thought to be location-specific, but they respond to a range of stimuli. Recent research has suggested that place cells may be more interested in a space's topological qualities than its geometry, which would be consistent with other known hippocampal functions. The study recorded place cell activity in rats exploring morphing linear tracks that allowed researchers to dissociate the geometry of the track from its topology. Results suggest that place fields preserved the relative sequence of places visited along the track, but did not vary with the metrical features of the track or the direction of the rat's movement. The article suggests that topological features of a space may form the basis for a cognitive map, instead of geometric qualities.
A study using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has found that at least three hypothalamic subsystems are involved in cardiovascular regulation in humans. The study used an MR-compatible lower body negative pressure (LBNP) chamber to simulate orthostatic stress and recorded blood pressure and heart rate traces during the LBNP-fMRI measurements, subjecting them to spectral analysis isolating two frequency bands: low frequency blood pressure variability (LFBPV) and high frequency heart rate variability (HFHRV). The study found five hypothalamic regions involved in cardiovascular regulation: the right anterior and bilateral tuberal LH/SON, the right tuberal PVN/PH and the arcuate nucleus. The study was able to distinguish three major hypothalamic cardiovascular control systems. The first represented the 'textbook' baroreflex arc, the second involved the right anterior aspect of the LH/SON, and the third involved the arcuate nucleus.
A study has revealed that proteins can persist in the fossil record for significantly longer than previously believed possible. Researchers analysed ostrich eggshells from Tanzania dating back to 3.8 million years ago and found that “distinct domains” of protein attached to the mineral surface of the shells, allowing the proteins to be preserved with a thermal age of 50 times older than any previously authenticated sequence. Proteins in fossils, unlike DNA, are not yet widely used to gain greater understanding of the evolutionary past since their survival is deemed unlikely.
The small size of model organisms, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, makes them ideal subjects for investigating developmental processes. However, the scale of these processes and their invasive nature can make it difficult to study them at a cellular level. To overcome these limitations, an automated quantitative histology approach has been established, which enables the extraction of hypocotyl cross-sections from high-resolution images and the extraction of cellular information to establish a cellular resolution atlas. This approach allows a better understanding of the cell proliferation, differentiation, and patterning events involved in secondary growth, especially in the hypocotyl. The use of a custom high-throughput image processing and segmentation pipeline coupled with automated cell type recognition through machine learning enables a better understanding of the temporal progression of secondary growth.
A study on breast cancer found that over half of related deaths occur due to recurrence five or more years after initial treatment. This suggests that residual tumor cells survive treatment and persist in a dormant state, indicating the importance of understanding how these cells survive and eventually form recurrent tumors. The study used a mouse model of Her2-driven breast cancer to examine the interactions between tumor cells and their microenvironment during tumor dormancy and recurrence. The study found that the interplay between tumor cells and their environment is critical for promoting tumor recurrence. Specifically, the study found that interactions between residual tumor cells and their microenvironment regulate residual cell survival and recurrence. The study identified interactions between residual tumor cells and immune cells, specifically macrophages, as contributing to tumor recurrence. Blocking the TNFα-CCL5-macrophage axis may be efficacious in preventing breast cancer recurrence. Lastly, the study found that CCL5 upregulation is a common feature of residual tumors cells.
Airport screening programs have been used during outbreaks of high-consequence pathogens to stop the contagion from spreading. However, the effectiveness of these programs depends on a variety of factors, including the pathogen's natural history and epidemiology, human behaviour, and the characteristics of the outbreak. In an attempt to understand how these factors combined to influence screening outcomes, a mathematical model was developed to analyse screening programs for six emerging pathogens in the early and late stages of an epidemic. The model showed that the effectiveness of different screening tools depends strongly on pathogen natural history and epidemiological features, as well as human factors in implementation and compliance. Arrival screening misses the majority of cases, even in the most optimistic scenario. Self-reporting of symptoms or potential recent exposure to infection via mandatory questionnaires is also a part of traveller screening programs, but it is not completely effective due to limited epidemiological knowledge. Fever screening has also been criticised because of its limitations in detecting infected passengers, which explains why many travellers have been detained for further assessment, and few or no cases were ultimately detected.
The article discusses the potential use of Pseudomonas bacteria as biocontrol agents to suppress plant pathogens such as Streptomyces scabies, which causes potato scab. The study involves assessing the genetic and phenotypic diversity of Pseudomonas fluorescens in a commercial potato field and identifying specialized metabolites, such as hydrogen cyanide and cyclic lipopeptides, that contribute to the bacteria's antagonism against S. scabies. The authors also examine the impact of irrigation on the soil microbiota and P. fluorescens population. The study highlights the potential of biocontrol agents in agriculture and emphasizes the importance of understanding genotypic and phenotypic variability at the individual isolate level to effectively develop biocontrol strategies.
Heterogeneity in cells plays a key role in differentiation and development, enabling position-independent patterning based on "salt and pepper" differentiation and eventual sorting out of cells. However, the molecular mechanisms of lineage priming and how it leads to reproducible cell type proportioning are not well understood. This study used a forward genetic approach in Dictyostelium discoideum to identify a gene, gefE, involved in lineage priming and salt and pepper differentiation. The Ras-GTPase regulator gefE is required for normal lineage priming and salt and pepper differentiation as it sets the intrinsic response threshold to lineage specific differentiation signals. Although gefE expression is uniform, transcription of its target, rasD, is both heterogeneous and dynamic, providing a novel mechanism for generating heterogeneity and position-independent differentiation. Growth conditions have previously been shown to bias lineage choice during Dictyostelium development, affecting developmental fate and sensitivity to differentiation signals like chlorinated alkyl phenone DIF-1. The nutritional conditions under which cells are grown have been shown to bias lineage choice during Dictyostelium development, and cells grown under different conditions exhibit different responses to differentiation signals during development. This study provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying salt and pepper differentiation and its importance in embryonic development.
This document discusses the concept of memory-guided attention, which refers to using past experiences to guide attentional states. The authors hypothesized that this type of attention is supported by neural preparation for anticipated attentional states. They looked at the hippocampus and mPFC, two regions important for memory-guided behavior, and found that both regions exhibited higher activity for memory-guided attention compared to explicitly instructed attention. The hippocampus, in particular, showed stronger preparation for memory-guided attention, which occurred alongside stronger coupling with the visual cortex during attentional guidance. The authors also discuss the limitations of our information processing capacity and how humans adaptively and efficiently function in complex environments. They highlight the mechanisms by which memories are used to prepare for upcoming attentional goals and explore the potential roles of the hippocampus and mPFC in memory-guided attention. The authors used a novel behavioral task and representational similarity analyses to test their hypotheses and found that the hippocampus and vmPFC establish memory-based attentional states prior to when those states must be used, primarily when they are guided by memory. Finally, they demonstrate effective engagement of attention and equivalent performance across memory-guided and explicitly instructed tasks.
Scientists have discovered two different scaffolds that stabilize GABAA receptors, both of which contain subunits encoded by genes linked to Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). The researchers utilized the C. elegans neuromuscular junction as a model to investigate this process, and found that immobilized and diffusing GABAA receptors are stabilized by distinct synapse scaffolds. Immobilized GABAA receptors are stabilized by FRM-3/EPB4.1 and LIN-2A/CASK, whilst diffusing GABA receptors are stabilized by the synaptic adhesion molecules Neurexin and Neuroligin. Mutations in these proteins are linked to autism disorders, and the study suggests that these mutations may directly alter inhibitory transmission, contributing to the developmental and cognitive deficits observed in ASD.
The article describes Khoomei, a unique singing style originating from Tuva in central Asia, where singers produce two pitches simultaneously - a low-frequency rumble and a high-pitched whistle-like tone. The biomechanics of this biphonation are not well-understood, but the article uses sound analysis, dynamic magnetic resonance imaging, and vocal tract modeling to demonstrate how biphonation is achieved by modulating vocal tract morphology. The study found that biphonation arises from linear filtering rather than from a nonlinear source, and vocal tract shaping provides an alternative explanation for biphonation. The article explains how the high-pitched formant in Khoomei is formed and provides an empirical analysis of vocal tract morphology during Khoomei singing.
Speech perception involves internal models of how specific sensory features are associated with speech sounds, and listeners need to recalibrate their internal models to weigh new versus old evidence. Previous models of speech recalibration have ignored volatility in changing environments. However, using neurocomputational modeling, researchers propose that natural speech sound categories should be represented at different timescales to account for changes in the stimulus landscape. Speech sound categories could be driven both by their current environment and their long-term memory representations. The brain continuously recalibrates generative models to maintain self-consistency, and neurocognitive adaptation to varying stimuli can occur with simple exposure to a changing stimulus environment via implicit statistical learning. The model accurately describes perceptual changes observed in speech sound categories after experiencing the McGurk effect. The model proposed here offers a neuro-computationally plausible implementation to resolve cognitive conflicts that can sometimes appear as irrational behaviors.
The document discusses the importance of understanding the genetic and environmental factors that affect energy balance in mice. The authors analyzed nearly 10,000 wild-type mice and 2,329 knockout strains to establish a reference for the magnitude of metabolic changes and to provide recommendations for designing and conducting energy balance experiments in rodents. They found that the largest variation in energy expenditure is due to body composition, ambient temperature, and institutional site of experimentation. The authors developed CalR, a tool that facilitates the analysis of calorimetry data, in an effort to standardize the analysis of indirect calorimetry studies. The authors recommend the use of ANCOVA for data treatment to compare metabolic data across papers studying metabolism. The study demonstrates variations in metabolic rates depending on factors such as body composition, physical activity, time of day, diet, and acclimation. The authors conclude that the findings underscore the large site-specific effects that contribute to the variability of metabolism and recommend the creation of a centralized metabolic data repository.
A new study has shown that exposure to certain smells when asleep can trigger the brain to reactivate memories linked to those scents, leading to memory consolidation. The researchers designed a test where participants were asked to memorize the positions of different objects on a 4x4 grid. Each object was associated with a different odor. While in slow-wave sleep, the participants were exposed to two of these odors at a time. The study showed that the reactivation of category-specific information in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex while asleep led to better memory performance when awake.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiac condition caused by a loss-of-function mutation in the IKs channel. There is currently no approved treatment for this condition. Researchers have identified about 300 mutations in the KCNQ1 and KCNE1 genes that are responsible for LQTS. In this study, the biophysical properties of eight LQTS-associated mutations in the KV7.1+KCNE1 channel were investigated. The researchers found that the mutations affected the voltage dependence and closing kinetics of the channel, but the mechanisms differed between mutations. The fatty acid analogue N-arachidonoyl taurine was found to restore channel function in these mutants, making it a potential prototype compound for future IKs channel activators to treat LQTS caused by diverse mutations.
Researchers have identified a novel chloride-selective anion conductance mediated by the melanosome-specific transmembrane protein OCA2. This anion channel is required for melanin synthesis, and defects in melanosome function causes albinism. By increasing organelle pH, the chloride channel may regulate melanin synthesis by modulating melanosome pH. These findings reveal a novel function for intracellular ion channels and are significant as defective melanin synthesis leads to increased susceptibility to skin and eye cancers.
Chemical modifications of guide RNA (gRNA) and donor DNA can potentially improve gene editing using CRISPR-Cas9 and Cpf1, but there is limited knowledge on the extent of chemical modifications that can be tolerated. This report shows that the terminal positions of gRNA and donor DNA can be chemically modified without losing activity. The modified donor DNA can be used as a marker to enrich cells with homology-directed repair (HDR) by a factor of two through cell sorting. The gRNA and donor DNA can be conjugated directly into one molecule, which has three times better transfection efficiency and HDR induction. The tolerance of gRNA and donor DNA to chemical modifications can provide new strategies for genome engineering. The study also investigated the tolerance of chemical modifications in Cas9 and Cpf1 gRNA and donor DNA. The results show toleration of modifications at one terminal with minimal activity loss, enabling a variety of new strategies for gRNA and donor DNA engineering. The donor DNA with 5’ and 3’ modifications tolerates modification without losing activity, enabling a variety of new strategies for donor DNA engineering. The study suggests that chemical modifications of gRNAs and donor DNA can be used to develop a fast and non-invasive method for enriching gene-edited cells that currently limits the development of gene-edited cell therapies and engineered cell lines.
Researchers have developed a new method for mapping expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) at the cellular level in Caenorhabditis elegans, a nematode model organism. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, they were able to map eQTLs in a population of 200,000 genetically distinct individuals, identifying cell-type-specific trans eQTL hotspots that affect core pathways in relevant cell types. The team also found single-cell-specific eQTL effects in the nervous system, including an eQTL with opposite effects in two individual neurons. The study highlights the potential of single-cell RNA sequencing for studying cell-type-specific eQTLs and their role in complex traits and diseases.
Researchers have discovered the cellular mechanism through which paternal mitochondria are eliminated from early mammalian embryos, a fundamental process that is crucial in ensuring only one haplotype of mitochondrial DNA is present in the offspring. The process involves mitophagy, a pathway in which mitochondria are sequestered by autophagosomes and delivered to lysosomes for degradation. The study used a dual-colour fluorescence-quenching assay based on an EGFP-mCherry reporter localized to the mitochondrial matrix and was undertaken on cultured mouse fibroblasts and early embryos. The mechanism relied on the E3 ubiquitin ligases PARKIN and MUL1.
Fast-spiking interneurons (FSIs) were found to modulate habit-predictive properties of habitual behavior in mice. FSIs were more excitable in habitual mice and acute inhibition of FSIs in the dorsolateral striatum prevented the expression of habitual lever pressing. These findings suggest that FSI activity is capable of promoting, rather than inhibiting, striatal projection neuron activity. The pharmacological agent IEM-1460 was used to inhibit FSI activity and modulated all of the habit-predictive SPN firing properties. These results establish a microcircuit mechanism for habitual behavior and provide a new example of how interneurons mediate experience-dependent behavior.
Researchers at the RIKEN Brain Science Institute in Japan have identified a molecular mechanism in the brain called translational control that selectively underlies auditory imprinting, that stage when experience-driven activation of molecular pathways begins to occur around birth, which is the period during which newly hatched birds and other animals learn to recognise their mothers. In a report published in eLife, the researchers showed they could reopen the critical period of auditory imprinting in chickens outside of the critical period by using drugs that blocked the protein synthesis controlled by phosphorylation of eIF2α. They argue that restoring translational control of eIF2α holds promise in rejuvenating adult brain plasticity and restoring learning and memory in a variety of cognitive disorders.

Researchers have identified the RNA sequence that triggers antiviral response in mammalian cells. The research team identified a single RNA sequence, in the viral genome of encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), which triggers the long-term activation of the MDA5 protein. They found that EMCV stimulates cells in a way that requires MDA5 to recognise a specific short RNA sequence in the virus genome. If confirmed in other viral infections, this finding could help researchers develop new treatments for viral infections.
Inflammatory mediator bradykinin (Bk) has been found to cause hyperalgesia, and while its effects on the sensory aspect of pain is well documented, its influence on motoneurons, the final pathway of the motor system, remain unknown. A combination of patch-clamp recordings and two-photon calcium imaging found that Bk strongly sensitizes spinal motoneurons, characterised by its increased ability to generate self-sustained spiking in response to excitatory inputs. Sensitization was brought on by the activation of B2 receptors, inhibition of a barium-sensitive resting K+ conductance and activation of a nonselective cationic conductance primarily mediated by Na+. Results suggest that pain-related behaviour might arise from direct Bk-evoked sensitization of motoneurons.
A computational approach has been developed to accurately determine the base-pair resolution of nucleosome positions using genome-wide MNase-seq data, overcoming a previous challenge of in vivo nucleosome mapping. The method, called the template-based Bayesian (TBB) approach, uses the length distribution of MNase-digested nucleosome fragments to determine the degree of variability for each midpoint nucleosome position. The study also identifies periodic occurrences of dinucleotide motifs relative to nucleosome dyads, revealing the prevalence of alternatively positioned nucleosomes and how this impacts broader cellular functions, such as gene transcription initiation.
A micropeptide called DWORF enhances SERCA activity by displacing the inhibitory peptide PLN and can mitigate the contractile dysfunction and Ca2+ dysregulation associated with heart failure (HF). HF is characterized by impaired Ca2+ sequestration into the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) by SERCA. DWORF overexpression in a mouse model of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) due to genetic deletion of muscle-specific LIM domain protein prevents pathological remodeling and Ca2+ dysregulation exhibited by knockout mice. Calcium dysregulation is the most prominent and widespread pathological feature of heart failure. SERCA activity inhibition leads to decreased contractile performance of the failing heart, and augmenting SERCA activity has been suggested as a therapy for heart failure. Overexpression of SERCA2a can improve cardiac function and the progression of cardiovascular disease in animal models. DWORF overexpression is a potential clinical approach to treating heart failure by preserving cardiac contractile function and restoring Ca2+ homeostasis.
Polyspermy, the fusion of one egg cell with multiple sperm, can bypass the triploid block - a postzygotic polyploidization barrier. This has been shown through a novel sco1-based polyspermy assay that found most polyspermy-derived triparental plants are insensitive to the triploid block suppressor admetos. Polyspermy can selectively polyploidize the egg cell while rendering the genome size of the ploidy-sensitive central cell unaffected, indicating that polyspermy can bypass the triploid block. Polyspermy-derived triparental plants are comparable to triploids recovered from interploidy crosses. The results have important implications for plant breeding and further expands our understanding of polyploidization events in flowering plants.
Researchers have developed a mouse model for the tick-borne pathogen Rickettsia parkeri, which causes skin lesions and disseminated disease in humans but generally does not infect inbred mice. However, when mice lacking both interferon receptors (Ifnar1-/-;Ifngr1-/-) were intradermally infected with as few as 10 R. parkeri, they developed eschar formation and disseminated, lethal disease. The actin-based motility factor Sca2 was found to be required for dissemination from the skin to internal organs, while the outer membrane protein OmpB contributed to eschar formation. Immunizing mice with sca2 and ompB mutant R. parkeri protected against rechallenge, revealing live-attenuated vaccine candidates. The study establishes the Ifnar1-/-;Ifngr1-/- mouse model as a tractable model to investigate rickettsiosis, virulence factors, and immunity, and suggests discrepancies between mouse and human susceptibility may be due to differences in interferon signaling.
Researchers have developed a new algorithm, called EPIC, which can estimate the fraction of different cell types, including immune and cancer cells, in solid tumours using bulk tumour gene expression data. The method integrates gene expression profiles from various non-malignant cell types found in tumours, allowing its ability to more accurately predict uncharacterised cell types. Validated using three publicly available datasets, the study showed the algorithm to be superior to other currently available methods.
Two new chemical probes have been discovered that can suppress the growth of human tumours, according to scientists from the UK Institute of Cancer Research. However, the probes also had potential toxic effects and proved incompatible with therapeutically-relevant diseases. The probes target CDK8/CDK19 kinase pathways, which regulate the transferal of signals between transcription factors and RNA polymerase II, affecting transcription function. The kinase paths' function depends on cell type and its role can vary, thus the new probes represent a significant advancement in the growth of tumour treatment options.
The APC protein is a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, which controls cell proliferation and fate in animals and is involved in several types of cancer. APC acts as part of the destruction complex, which includes the scaffold Axin and the kinases GSK3 and CK1, and targets the transcriptional co-activator βcatenin for destruction. Despite 20 years of research, the mechanistic function of APC remains mysterious. Recent research has shed light on two conserved binding sites in APC, R2 and B, which are essential for targeting βcatenin for destruction. These sites were found to negatively regulate APC/Axin interaction, prompting researchers to explore the structure and dynamics of the destruction complex. The research suggests that APC plays two roles in the active destruction complex: promoting efficient Axin multimerization through known and novel APC:Axin interaction sites, and regulating APC:Axin interactions via motifs R2 and B to target βcatenin for destruction. The study provides insights into the assembly and function of multivalent signaling complexes and how they go wrong in cancer.
Actin filaments, previously thought to only exist in the cytoplasm, have been found to form in the nucleus of cells in response to various conditions including DNA damage. These nuclear actin filaments are involved in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks and are required for DNA damage-associated bursts of oxidation in the nucleus. The filaments are formed by two nucleation factors, Formin-2 and Spire-1/Spire-2, and their assembly is regulated by actin's nuclear import and export factors. Three types of nuclear actin structures have been identified and are essential for various cellular processes. These structures are detected by fluorescent probes and are used to visualize the state of the nucleus following DNA damage.
The study explores the microbial transmission in a commercial food-production scenario to understand the modes of microbial transmission and spoilage-gene frequency in a brewery. The research detected distinct microbial ecosystems and patterns of dispersal and identified potential contaminant reservoirs within the environment. The study used a Bayesian approach for predicting routes of contamination, revealing critical control points for microbial management. The research found that microbial transmission is an inherent feature of food-processing systems, influencing the quality and healthfulness of foods for human consumption, and required exploring genetic landscapes of indoor environments calling for suitable food-production systems.
The study investigated how the brain processes visual information and translates it into motor signals for grasping objects. The study focused on three key areas of the macaque cortical grasping circuit, namely the anterior intraparietal area (AIP), the ventral premotor area (F5), and the primary motor cortex (M1), and found that these areas function cooperatively but separately. AIP operated primarily in a visual mode, with neurons specializing in processing shape, while F5 functioned as a hub that shared visual coding with AIP but switched to highly dominant motor signals when planning and executing movements. The study used multidimensional observations from many neurons to differentiate between visual and motor coding in the fronto-parietal network. The study revealed that the AIP provided access to the dorsal visual stream that processes vision for action, and its neurons responded vigorously to the presentation of graspable objects or 3D contours. Neurons in AIP were found to encode specific grip types, and information processed in AIP was exchanged with F5 via dense reciprocal connections. The results of the study allowed visualization of the propagation of visual and motor features for grasping, revealing the distinct roles of these features in translating visual object attributes into planning and execution signals.
Membrane fusion, which occurs on the exocytic and endocytic pathways, requires a complex interplay between proteins and lipids. Specific vacuole lipids are required for efficient fusion in yeast and other organisms. An assay of the fusion of purified vacuoles revealed that neutral lipids with small headgroups were essential, whereas phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine alone could not perform the necessary function. The roles of each type of lipid in the fusion reaction were examined in further detail by sequentially removing one lipid at a time, substituting additional phosphatidylcholine in its place. The sequential removal of phosphatidylethanolamine, diacylglycerol, and ergosterol reduced the rate and extent of fusion, to the point where no fusion was detected when all three of these lipids were omitted.
The transfer of integrative and conjugative elements (ICE) in Pseudomonas requires a transfer competence state that arises in only 3-5% of cells in stationary phase. The regulatory basis for this activation has been largely unknown. Using genetic tools and epistasis experiments in P. putida, researchers have identified three transcription factor-nodes that control this bistable switch between non-active and transfer competent cells as well as a feedback loop that acts as a scalable converter of unimodal to bistable output. This feedback loop also enables prolonged production of a heteromeric transcription factor named BisDC, which ensures expression of downstream functions mediating ICE transfer competence in activated cells. The regulatory factors and nodes underlying the activation of ICE transfer competence are conserved among a wide range of Proteobacteria.
The Zika virus, which has caused global concern due to its neurological complications and rapid geographical spread, had previously circulated mainly in Asia and the Pacific before reaching the Americas in 2015. Scientists have used data from previous Zika epidemics in Pacific islands to estimate the basic reproductive number (R0), a key parameter in quantifying the magnitude of ongoing outbreaks, and to provide insight when designing control interventions. The study finds that the R0 for Pacific ZIKV epidemics is estimated between 1.5 and 4.1, with the smallest islands displaying higher and more variable values. The variability of R0 by settings suggests that intervention strategies developed for other flaviviruses should enable effective control of Zika. The study also emphasises the importance of seroprevalence data for precise quantitative analysis of pathogen propagation in the design of prevention and control strategies.
A study has revealed that YTHDF1-3 proteins, which control the stability and translation of target mRNAs, recognise m6A-modified HIV-1 RNA and inhibit its replication in cell lines and primary CD4+ T-cells. The overexpression of YTHDF proteins in cells mainly inhibits HIV-1 infection by decreasing its reverse transcription, while knockdown of YTHDF1-3 in cells produces the opposite effect. The YTHDF1-3 proteins selectively bind to methylated mRNAs and affect RNA metabolism and processing. The study suggests an important role of m6A modification of HIV-1 RNA in viral infection and HIV-1 protein synthesis.
A new study has identified functional roles for lncRNAs (long noncoding RNAs) in various physiological conditions, including embryonic development and viability. The researchers developed a collection of 18 lncRNA knockout strains in mice and found lethal phenotypes in three mutant strains. The study also revealed defects in organs such as lungs, heart, and the gastrointestinal tract. The selected lncRNAs showed diverse potential roles, ranging from regulating the cell cycle and chromosome organization and maintenance to neuronal differentiation and immune response. The study demonstrated that lncRNAs play critical roles in vivo, and the collection of knockout mice established enabled the exploration of the new-found roles of lncRNAs in enhancer activity.
A new study has used Mendelian randomization analysis to investigate the health effects of free testosterone in 161,268 males from the UK Biobank. The analysis found that lifelong increases in free testosterone had beneficial effects on bone mineral density and decreased body fat but also adverse effects on decreased HDL and increased risks of prostate cancer, androgenic alopecia, spinal stenosis, and hypertension. The study suggests that the benefits of long-term testosterone treatment should be considered against adverse effects, notably increased prostate cancer and hypertension. Well-powered randomized trials are needed to conclusively address risks and benefits of testosterone treatment on these outcomes.
Floral scents and nectar are known to attract pollinators, but they also attract herbivores, causing a dilemma for plants. Not producing nectar or scent can cheat pollinators, but it can also reduce pollination success. Researchers studied coyote tobacco plants to experimentally uncouple floral rewards and attractants, measuring their costs and benefits in the plant's native habitat and experimental tents. They found that both scent and nectar increased outcrossing rates for pollinators and increased oviposition by a herbivorous hawkmoth, with nectar being more influential than scent. The study highlights that it is important to consider both pollinators and antagonists when studying floral traits. Native populations of coyote tobacco, Nicotiana attenuata, produce highly variable amounts of nectar and scent, with some plants even producing none at all. This study used RNAi to completely uncouple nectar and scent production to examine their costs and benefits.
Researchers used ancient DNA techniques to target viral pathogens in DNA extracts from individuals buried during colonial epidemics in Mexico City. Three ancient parvovirus B19 genomes and one ancient hepatitis B virus genome were reconstructed and found to be similar to African strains, suggesting an origin on the African continent and direct molecular evidence of ancient viruses being transported to the Americas during the transatlantic slave trade. This study enriches the discussion about the etiology of infectious diseases during the colonial period in Mexico and sheds light on the genetic exchange between Native American populations, Europeans, and Africans during European colonization in the Americas.
The role of the retrosplenial cortex (RSC) in integrating visual information for spatial navigation is not well understood. A study using a behavioral task in mice suggests that RSC plays a key role in encoding and anchoring spatial information based on visual landmark cues. Supralinear integration of visual and motor inputs is important for landmark encoding, and axons from the primary visual cortex (V1) may shape receptive fields in RSC. The study also found that RSC activity contributes to successful execution of the spatial navigation task. The findings support the idea that RSC is an important neural substrate for landmark encoding and sheds light on the cortico-cortical feedback loop between primary sensory and associative cortex.
The lack of lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 3 (LPCAT3) in mice causes a drastic reduction in membrane arachidonate levels, affecting luminar TG transport and leading to gut dysfunction. LPCAT3 plays a critical and relatively specific role in the regulation of arachidonate levels in membrane phospholipids in vivo. This study identifies LPCAT3 as a major regulator of membrane phospholipid arachidonate, which is a critical factor affecting luminal TG transport. LPCAT3 deficiency largely decreased arachidonate-containing 36:4 PC and 38:4 PC levels, but not linoleate-containing 34:2 PC. LPCAT3 mRNA was ubiquitously detected, with high expression in the intestine, followed by the liver. In vivo, LPCAT3 expression was highest in the proximal small intestine.
A study of the genome of the tardigrade (also known as a water bear), a microscopic invertebrate that is renowned for its ability to survive extreme conditions including exposure to space and freezing, has found that a lamin derivative has been co-opted to enhance tissue stability in tardigrades, a function otherwise served by cytoplasmic intermediate filament (IF) proteins in all other animals. IF proteins protect tissues against mechanical force, and while lamins occur in most eukaryotes, IF proteins are thought to have evolved from lamin genes by duplication in the bilaterian lineage. In this study, it was discovered that ancestral cytoplasmic IF protein genes were lost in the entire panarthropod (onychophoran + tardigrade + arthropod) lineage and that nuclear, lamin-derived proteins acquired cytoplasmic roles three times independently in collembolans, copepods, and tardigrades. The study also found that no cytoplasmic IF proteins have been convincingly identified in arthropods.
Researchers have identified tannic acid (TA) as a potent small molecule sumoylation inhibitor. This was achieved by developing a cell-based screen that focused on human Liver Receptor Homolog-1 (hLRH-1), a well-sumoylated substrate, which increased hLRH-1 occupancy on SUMO-sensitive transcripts. The study also established that hLRH-1 is efficiently sumoylated in several platforms, making it an excellent test substrate for assessing both the biochemical and functional effects of small molecule inhibitors of sumoylation. Through the screen, APOC3 and MUC1 were identified as the readout transcripts for sumoylation. The researchers argue that the approach highlights the benefits of phenotypic screening for targeting post-translational modifications, and illustrate the potential utility of TA for probing the cellular consequences of sum
Researchers have used computational design to create proteins that can detect the potent and addictive drug fentanyl. The proteins were designed using a fast docking algorithm to find chemically complementary spots in protein structures for the drug, followed by the addition of surrounding residues to optimise binding affinity. Various co-crystal structures were made of the strongest binder, which matched the design model closely. The proteins were expressed using yeast surface display, and a Fen49 mutation was found with an increased affinity for fentanyl. Finally, the team solved an atomic resolution X-ray crystal structure of Fen49*-fentanyl complex, showing a high degree of similarity to the Fen49*-apo and designed models.
The current genetic methods of targeting neurons in the brain do not achieve the necessary resolution for mapping brain circuits. A new method, called Split Cre-assisted Restriction of Cell Class-Lineage Intersections (SpaRCLIn), is introduced to refine neuronal targeting, which can be applied iteratively. The method involves using two distinct neuroblast enhancers to limit the number of lineages, driving the expression of split Cre recombinase fragments that are fused to split inteins for the reconstitution of active Cre when all fragments are expressed. The method can facilitate neural circuit-mapping in Drosophila. The approach increases the specificity of neuronal targeting by identifying neurons based on their developmental history and the genes they express in the terminally differentiated state, which will restrict targeting anatomically. The benefits of using the method are improved reproducibility, simplicity, and versatility in characterizing many neurally active enhancer elements. The study provides an extensive explanation of the method and its potential benefits, including rendering all neuroblast-derived cells in a lineage permissive for Gal4 activity.
Researchers have successfully converted pancreatic acinar cells, which are exocrine cells that typically produce digestive enzymes, into three major islet endocrine cell subtypes - insulin-secreting beta cells, somatostatin-secreting delta cells and glucagon-secreting alpha cells. While beta cells are crucial for regulating blood glucose levels, alpha and delta cells secrete glucagon and somatostatin, respectively, to help beta cells function. The method could be useful for cellular therapies and disease modelling.
The study investigates the role of linker-cell-type death (LCD) in controlling metazoan cell death in vertebrate development. LCD is a non-apoptotic cell death process that is morphologically conserved in both in Caenorhabditis elegans and vertebrate development. The study finds that LCD is controlled by redundant activities of antagonistic Wnt signals, a temporal control pathway, and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase signaling, which control heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1), a conserved stress-activated transcription factor. HSF-1 promotes cell death by activating components of the ubiquitin proteasome system. The study also identifies design similarities between LCD and developmental apoptosis in the transcriptional pathways they initiate for cell death. The study suggests that the molecular understanding of LCD will provide further insights into the prevalence and importance of this process in development.
Researchers have developed an optogenetic approach that utilizes an engineered Light-Regulated (LightR) allosteric switch module to achieve tight spatiotemporal control of enzymatic activity. The LightR-Src off-kinetics can be tuned by modulating the LightR photoconversion cycle. The design of the LightR module ensures broad applicability of the tool, as they demonstrate by achieving light-mediated regulation of Abl and bRaf kinases as well as Cre recombinase. The application of allosteric switches in optogenetics has been scarce, and existing allosteric switches lack the ability to tune the activation/inactivation kinetics, an essential feature required for mimicking different temporal signaling modes of enzymes. This development enables light-mediated allosteric control of enzymatic activity and combines the essential advantages of optogenetics in one tool.
The article discusses the role of tryparedoxin peroxidases in the detoxification of lipid-derived hydroperoxides in African trypanosomes, which are responsible for the disease causing human sleeping sickness and Nagana cattle disease. The lack of these enzymes leads to cell death known as ferroptosis, which is linked to various degenerative diseases, cancer, and kidney degeneration. The article also explores the various ways in which the peroxidases protect the cell and the mechanisms by which ferroptosis is inhibited. The trypanosomes have an unusual thiol redox metabolism, in which trypanothione and the flavoenzyme trypanothione reductase (TR) are involved. The article explores various ways in which the cell death is prevented, including through supplementation of Trolox, deferoxamine, and ferrostatin-1, and how this is linked to the iron-induced accumulation of cellular lipid hydroperoxides. Finally, the article discusses the ability of RSL3 to be trypanocidal but not selectively so, and the role of the active site cysteine instead of the selenocysteine in GPx4 in this process.
This study tests the gaze-signaling hypothesis, which proposes that humans evolved unique external eye morphologies with uniformly white sclera to enhance the visibility of eye-gaze for communication, by examining the ability of humans and chimpanzees to discriminate eye-gaze directions in computerized tasks. The study finds that both species discriminate eye-gaze directions better in humans than in chimpanzees, particularly in visually challenging conditions, and that participants of both species discriminate chimpanzee eye-gaze directions better when the chimpanzee eye has human-like white sclera and a darker iris. This supports the gaze-signaling hypothesis and highlights the importance of eye-gaze in conspecific communication during social activities such as cooperation, teaching, and language learning. However, there are potential differences between humans and nonhuman apes in their use and interpretation of gaze behaviors, indicating differences in sociocognitive skills and humans' specialization to eye-gaze signals in communication. The external eye morphology of humans has been challenged by recent quantitative morphological studies showing that certain eye features of humans are not necessarily unique among great ape species, but uniform whiteness in humans' exposed sclera, i.e., depigmentation all the way from the iris edge to the eye corners, contributes to the visibility of eye-gaze directions. Experimental evidence from this study supports the hypothesis of uniformly white sclera facilitating gaze perception, independently of perceptual advantages of other eye features or participants' expertise in a certain eye contrast polarity. The study follows a fully crossed design for species comparison to examine the effect of sclera colors on primate gaze perception, clarifying the uniformly white sclera's perceptual advantage, particularly in visually challenging conditions.
The document discusses a study on the transmission dynamics of the Zika virus in Feira de Santana, Brazil, using a climate-driven transmission model and case data. The study found a low observation rate and high vectorial capacity resulted in a significant attack rate during the 2015 outbreak, with subsequent decline and fade-out in 2017 due to herd-immunity. The study also found a potential Zika-related low risk for microcephaly per pregnancy but with significant public health impact given high attack rates. The document includes detailed information on the methodology used in the study, including a climate-driven transmission model, Bayesian framework, and stochastic simulations. The study concludes that the potential for Zika to cause another outbreak or establish itself endemically in Feira de Santana is strongly dependent on the frequency of reintroductions.
The document discusses the relationship between the endosymbiotic bacteria Spiroplasma poulsonii and its host, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The study found that Spiroplasma needs specific lipids from the hemolymph of its host for proliferation, and that reducing the availability of these lipids inhibits the bacteria's growth. The study also found that Spiroplasma shortens the life span of its host under normal conditions, but has limited fitness costs under nutrient-limiting conditions. The bacteria's proliferation is also inhibited under nutrient-limiting conditions. The study sheds light on the mutualistic relationship between Spiroplasma and its host, and the specific metabolites endosymbiotic bacteria require for proliferation.
Researchers have discovered a novel population of brain cells signalling direction in the nucleus reuniens of the thalamus in rats. These "head direction" cells have the potential to modulate the hippocampal CA fields, directly informing spatial processing and memory. The isolation of these cells in the nucleus reuniens is significant because it is the major source of direct thalamic projections to the CA fields of the rat hippocampus, making it pivotal in influencing hippocampal spatial processing directly because of its dense direct connections with both the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus.
The activation of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is essential for memory formation. In this study, scientists have discovered that when the holoenzyme of CaMKII is activated, subunits are exchanged among holoenzymes, including unactivated ones, allowing for the calcium-independent phosphorylation of new subunits. The study was conducted using a single-molecule TIRF microscopy technique, and the exchange process was found to be modulated by phosphorylation of two residues, Thr 305 and Thr 306. These findings have implications for how information is stored in the brain. Additionally, CaMKII plays an important role in modulating cardiac pacemaking and excitation-contraction coupling, and several heart diseases are associated with its hyper-activation.
This study investigated the role of podosome-like structures (PLSs) induced by extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in regulating the formation and remodeling of acetylcholine receptor (AChR) clusters at vertebrate neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). The researchers found that PLSs regulate the formation and remodeling of AChR clusters through ECM degradation mediated by membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP). MT1-MMP plays a crucial role in the recruitment of aneural AChR clusters for the assembly of postsynaptic specializations. Furthermore, the study demonstrated that MT1-MMP is required for the recruitment of AChR molecules from aneural to synaptic AChR clusters at developing NMJs in vitro and in vivo. The study suggests that postsynaptic MT1-MMP serves as a molecular switch to synaptogenesis by modulating local ECM environment for the deposition of synaptogenic signals that regulate postsynaptic differentiation at developing NMJs.
Researchers have discovered that distinct mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the developing bone marrow of long bones have different functions. Proliferative mesoderm-derived nestin- MSCs participate in fetal skeletogenesis and stop having MSC activity soon after birth. In contrast, quiescent neural crest-derived nestin+ cells do not generate fetal chondrocytes but differentiate into HSC niche-forming MSCs, which secrete Cxcl12, and thus establish the HSC niche by helping to form a microenvironment where haematopoietic stem cells can divide and differentiate. These niche-forming MSCs share a common origin with sympathetic peripheral neurons and glial cells, and ontogenically distinct MSCs have non-overlapping functions in endochondrogenesis and HSC niche formation. The study also found that fetal bone marrow Nestin-GFP+ Pdgfrα- cell population contains Schwann cell precursors, but does not comprise mature Schwann cells. In summary, the data showed a functional segregation of MSCs derived from different germ layers. The findings also exhibited that three HSC niche components: peripheral sympathetic neurons, Schwann cells, and MSCs share a common origin.
A large-scale transcription factor (TF) screen identified 22 novel pro-adipogenic TFs, with ZEB1 being the top ranking TF. Its expression levels correlate with fat cell differentiation potential in humans. Genomic profiling revealed that ZEB1 directly targets and controls the expression of most early and late adipogenic regulators, identifying ZEB1 as a central transcriptional component of fat cell differentiation. The master regulator PPARγ was among the 26 stringently selected top ranking candidates, serving as a positive control. Overexpression of 6 out of 8 follow-up TFs, which were not previously implicated in adipogenesis, led to increased lipid content within the respective cells and a strong induction of adipogenic gene expression.
Researchers have used the transcriptome dynamics of the Creolimax fragrantissima﻿ (a relative of animals) to investigate how cell-type specification through differential genome regulation evolved during the transition from unicellular to multicellular organisms. The team found that Creolimax utilises dynamic regulation of alternative splicing, long inter-genic non-coding RNAs and co-regulated gene modules associated with animal multicellularity in a cell-type specific manner. The results suggest that the last common unicellular ancestor of animals was already capable of implementing cell type-specific differentiation programs.
The medial subnucleus of the amygdala (MeA) plays a significant role in processing sensory cues that contribute to innate behaviors, but how inborn behaviors are linked to developmental programs remains unknown. A recent study examined the embryonic parcellation and differentiation of MeA destined progenitors in the telencephalic preoptic area (POA) of mice. The researchers found that the POA consists of distinct progenitor pools that are marked by transcription factors Dbx1 and Foxp2, which predict postnatal MeA inhibitory neuronal subtype identity. The Dbx1-derived and Foxp2+ cells in the MeA were also differentially activated in response to innate behavioral cues, with sex-specific neuronal responses. Overall, this study provides a potential developmental framework for how innate behaviors could be processed by different MeA neuronal subtypes.
A study conducted in Eswatini aimed to determine the impact of immediate initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) on patients' economic outcomes. The study found that there was no significant difference between those who received immediate ART and those who received ART based on a CD4 count threshold for any economic outcome, including time use, employment status, household expenditures, and household living standards. The study also found no evidence of heterogeneity in effect estimates by patients’ sex, age, education, timing of HIV diagnosis, and ART initiation. The study supports the 2015 World Health Organization recommendation to offer immediate ART initiation to all HIV patients.
Tubulin cofactors and the GTPase Arl2 regulate the assembly of αβ-tubulin heterodimers in microtubules, but the physical mechanisms were previously unknown. A new study has reconstituted a core tubulin chaperone consisting of the tubulin cofactors TBCD, TBCE and Arl2 and found that they assemble into a stable heterotrimeric chaperone with a cage-like structure. As the αβ-tubulin dimer is sequentially bound, GTP hydrolysis activates to alter αβ-tubulin conformation so that it can support microtubule dynamics. Mutations in the Arl2 GTP
New research shows that sleep loss can severely impair the ability to perform but the ability to recover from sleep loss is not well understood. The study found that restoring the circadian clock gene Bmal1, which regulates sleep, in the brains of mice did not rescue sleep phenotypes. Most sleep amount phenotypes, but not sleep timing, could be reproduced or rescued by knocking out or restoring BMAL1 exclusively in skeletal muscle, respectively. Overexpression of skeletal-muscle Bmal1 reduced the recovery response to sleep loss. These findings suggest that Bmal1 expression in skeletal muscle is both necessary and sufficient to regulate total sleep amount and reveal that critical components of normal sleep regulation occur in muscle. The study also demonstrates that restoring Bmal1 in the skeletal muscle of Bmal1-deficient mice is sufficient to restore normal SWA following sleep loss. These findings suggest an important role for skeletal muscle in sleep regulation, and Bmal1-dependent processes in skeletal muscle may be useful therapeutic targets for sleep disorders.
The cerebellum is responsible for motor coordination and contains various modules that communicate with each other through synaptic connections. This study used transgenic mice to investigate how incoming sensorimotor information is channeled and communicated between these modules. They found that each type of connection displayed position-specific patterns of granule cell synaptic inputs that do not strictly match with anatomical boundaries but connect distant cortical modules. These patterns were consistent and predictable between animals and establish the operational rules underlying communication between modules in the cerebellar cortex. These findings highlight the anatomical and neurochemical heterogeneity of the cerebellar cortex and suggest that specific communication rules between neighboring microzones might arise from this heterogeneity. Finally, long-range connectivity between brain areas and the basic organization of microcircuits underlie information processing in individual and adjacent microzones.
The protein Scribble (SCRIB) is important for cell polarity but how it is recruited and stabilized at the cell cortex is not well understood. In this study, researchers discovered that SCRIB binds to the CH1 domain of β spectrins, which connect to the plasma membrane and contribute to the cortical actin cytoskeleton. They also identified an evolutionary conserved motif called SADH (SCRIB ABLIMs DMTN Homology), which is necessary for SCRIB interaction with β spectrins. Mutations in SCRIB SADH domains are associated with spina bifida and cancer and can alter SCRIB stability at the plasma membrane. The study also found that SCRIB interacts with actin-associated β2 spectrin through its β-spectrin binding motifs. The SADH motif is conserved in vertebrates and is present in other proteins such as dematin and ABLIM1-3, which display strong homology with the SCRIB putative spectrin binding motif.
Central Europe is facing more frequent and prolonged periods of drought due to global climate change, which has had a detrimental impact on European beech trees. A natural experiment was conducted to study the genomic basis of drought resistance in these trees using Pool-GWAS. The study found that drought resistance in European beech is a moderately polygenic trait that should respond well to natural selection, selective management, and breeding. The study identified 106 significantly associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) throughout the genome and developed an SNP assay with 70 loci that allowed predicting drought phenotype in 98.6% of a validation sample of 92 trees. This could help accelerate and monitor natural selection and harness beech forests against climate change.
This document discusses the process of segmentation in the Drosophila embryo, which involves patterning the body into repeating units using specific genes. The pair-rule genes, which are expressed in a double-segment periodicity, play a crucial role in this process. The document presents findings that demonstrate that frequency-doubling, which leads to the patterning of 14 parasegment boundaries, is caused by multiple coordinated changes to the network of regulatory interactions between the pair-rule genes. The document also identifies a transcription factor, Odd-paired, as the cause of these changes. The pair-rule gene regulatory network allows the genes to play stage-specific patterning roles. The document describes the pair-rule patterning process as a two-stage process that relies on the interplay of spatial and temporal signals. The document also provides detailed information about pair-rule gene expression patterns during different stages of development.
The Drosophila brain circadian network has two long-standing models for its function: a dual oscillator model, which emphasizes the primacy of PDF-containing neurons, and a cell-autonomous model for circadian phase adjustment. The experiments identified five different circadian neurons called E neurons, which are a major source of rhythmicity and locomotor activity. Firing of PDF cells at different times of day generates a phase response curve (PRC) and requires PDF receptor expression in the five E neurons. Firing also resembles light by causing TIM degradation in downstream neurons. The E neurons are important for timekeeping under light-dark conditions, whereas the PDF neurons are more important for light-mediated phase adjustment.
The article discusses the importance of synaptic plasticity in allowing organisms to adapt to their environment and how this can be mathematically described through "plasticity rules". Researchers propose an automated approach for discovering biophysically plausible plasticity rules based on defining task families, associated performance measures, and biophysical constraints. They successfully apply their approach to three different learning paradigms for spiking neuronal networks and discover previously unknown mechanisms for learning efficiently from rewards, recover efficient gradient-descent methods for learning from target signals, and uncover various functionally equivalent STDP-like rules with tuned homeostatic mechanisms. The researchers use genetic programming as a search algorithm to discover these plasticity rules in spiking neuronal networks. They propose a recipe for searching for biophysically plausible plasticity rules, which involves determining a task family of interest, defining a fitness function, and specifying the neuronal variables available to the plasticity rule. The article discusses the results of three experiments following this recipe and the potential of automated procedures in the search for plasticity rules in spiking neuronal networks.
Researchers have investigated in rat cerebellar slices synaptic currents in Unipolar Brush Cells (UBCs) that generate intrinsic mossy fibers relaying vestibular inputs to the cerebellar cortex. UBCs respond to sinusoidal modulations of their sensory input with heterogeneous amplitudes and phase shifts resulting from the kinetics of synaptic glutamate transients and the diversity of postsynaptic receptors. Granular layer network modeling indicates that phase dispersion of UBC responses generates diverse phase coding in the granule cell population, allowing climbing-fiber-driven Purkinje cell learning at arbitrary phases of the vestibular input.
The inner plexiform layer (IPL) of the mouse retina consists of approximately 70 neuronal subtypes, which organize their neurites into distinct laminar structures that underlie visual processing. In order to identify recognition proteins that are involved in lamination, the researchers used microarray data from 13 subtypes to identify differentially-expressed extracellular proteins, and performed a high-throughput biochemical screen. They identified approximately 50 previously-unknown receptor-ligand pairs, some of which are among members of the FLRT and Unc5 families. These proteins show laminar-restricted IPL localization and induce attraction and/or repulsion of retinal neurites in culture, placing them in an ideal position to mediate laminar targeting. In vivo results were consistent with a repulsive role in arbor lamination. The authors suggest that FLRTs and Unc5s may be positioned to provide a code for mediating laminar organization in the developing mouse IPL, and that further research could facilitate the assembly of neural circuits in a stereotyped fashion.
The article discusses the discovery of erastin, a potent and selective inhibitor of the cell-surface Na+-independent cystine–glutamate antiporter, system xc−. Inhibition of this system leads to activation of an ER stress response and upregulation of CHAC1, providing a pharmacodynamic marker for system xc− inhibition. The clinically approved anti-cancer drug, sorafenib, has been found to inhibit system xc− function and can trigger ferroptosis, a novel cell death pathway. Aberrant system xc− function is implicated in various diseases, therefore inhibition of this system may prove useful in a number of therapeutic contexts.
The mammalian LINE-1 retrotransposon, known as L1, contributes to human genotypic diversity, genetic disease, and cancer. L1 encodes two essential proteins, L1ORF1p and L1ORF2p, which are required for autonomous retrotransposition. L1ORF1p contains an essential, but rapidly evolving N-terminal portion that homo-trimerizes via a coiled coil and packages L1RNA into large assemblies. Recent research has determined the crystal structures of the entire coiled coil domain of human L1ORF1p and revealed that retrotransposition requires a non-ideal and metastable coiled coil structure, and a strongly basic L1ORF1p amino terminus. L1ORF1p therefore emerges as a highly calibrated molecular machine, sensitive to mutation but functional in different hosts. The research rationalizes the locally rapid L1ORF1p sequence evolution and suggests important novel steps in L1 retrotransposition. The findings also have implications for human health and for the applications of stem cells in medicine and research.
Single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) has undergone a revolution due to a new generation of detectors, leading to near-atomic resolution reconstructions of samples in the megaDalton mass range, including protein complexes previously considered too small for this technique. Recent developments have enabled single particle cryoEM to compete with X-ray crystallography in determining protein structures. The structure of the 700 kDa Thermoplasma acidophilum 20S proteasome (T20S) has been determined at 2.8 Å resolution by single particle cryoEM. The reconstruction of T20S allows the identification of rotameric conformation of amino-acid side chains and ordered water molecules, and provides protein structures of suitable quality for structure-based drug design.
PanelPRO is an R package designed to identify individuals at high risk of cancer due to inherited germline mutations. It provides a fast, flexible back-end for multi-gene, multi-cancer risk modeling with pedigree data, incorporating family history on several cancers and predicting mutations for a comprehensive panel of genes. The package is customizable and includes a customizable database with default parameter values estimated from published studies. It allows users to select any combinations of genes and cancers for their models, including well-established single syndrome BayesMendel models. PanelPRO includes functions to visualize its output graphically and compare results to other platforms and models. It predicts an individual's probability of having a specified genotype and estimates the future cancer risk based on the individual's genotype distribution. The package is highly flexible, fully customizable, and provides an efficient interface to calculate carrier probabilities for a wide array of cancer susceptibility genes, as well as future cancer risks.
The aim of this study was to investigate the neuronal activity during rhythmic motor behaviours in spinal circuits of turtles, and establish the fraction of neurons that operate within either a ‘mean-driven’ or ‘fluctuation-driven’ regime. Fluctuation-driven neurons have a supralinear input-output curve, which enhances sensitivity, whereas the mean-driven regime reduces sensitivity. The firing rate distribution revealed a rich diversity of firing rates across the neuronal population, which may reflect a trade-off between stability and sensitivity in order to maintain flexibility across behaviours. The study identified a unique experimental investigation by exploring the link between neuronal ensemble data, which in itself is rare in spinal motor research, and the forefront of theoretical neuroscience. 
The study explores the role of the scaffold protein IKKγ/NEMO in mediating RANKL-induced signaling in osteoclast precursors. The researchers used site-specific mutagenesis and identified lysine (K) 270 as a target regulating RANKL signaling. The K270A substitution resulted in exuberant osteoclastogenesis in vitro and murine inflammatory osteolysis in vivo. The mutation disrupted autophagy, stabilized NEMO, and elevated inflammatory burden, hindering the binding of NEMO to ISG15, a ubiquitin-like protein that targets modified proteins to autophagy-mediated lysosomal degradation. The study shows that NEMO serves as a toolkit to fine-tune specific signals in physiological and pathological conditions.
The FtsZ protein is essential for bacterial cell division and forms a ring structure at future division sites called the Z-ring. This study identifies the nature and importance of lateral interactions between FtsZ protofilaments in the Z-ring. The study found that two different inter-protofilament interfaces enable FtsZ protofilaments to self-organize into a dynamic Z-ring. In vivo photocrosslinking studies confirmed that such lateral interactions occur in living cells, and disruption of the lateral interactions rendered cells unable to divide. These results may have implications for developing antibiotics that target bacterial cell division.
Research has shown that in both plants and animals, RNA interference plays a crucial role in defending against viral infection. A study of nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and its natural pathogen, the positive-strand RNA virus Orsay, revealed a genome-wide association with a 159 base-pair deletion in the DRH-1 gene. DRH-1 is required for initiating an antiviral RNAi pathway and the generation of virus-derived siRNAs (viRNAs), a crucial component in fighting viral infection. The study also revealed that DRH-1 acts as a modular viral recognition factor, coupling viral recognition to different effector pathways including RNAi and interferon responses. This mechanism of defense is present in all multicellular organisms and allows cells to recognize specific pathogens and deploy an appropriate response. RNA viruses rely on RNA-dependent RNA polymerase to replicate and neutralizing them therefore requires the viral genome to be recognized amid endogenous RNA. In plants and insects, antiviral defense is mediated by RNA interference (RNAi), which initiates a response through detection and subsequent cleavage of the double-stranded replication intermediate by members of the Dicer family of endonucleases. The initial step in protection against positive strand RNA virus infection in animals is detection and subsequent cleavage of the double-stranded replication intermediate to defend against RNA viral infection.
Researchers have found that muscle stem cells (satellite cells) play a crucial role in preventing muscle loss due to neuromuscular junction (NMJ) deterioration, which is often observed in neuromuscular diseases and aging. Previous studies suggested that satellite cells had little impact on NMJ repair and maintenance, but experiments with mice demonstrated that satellite cell depletion worsened muscle atrophy and type transitions related to NMJ disruption. The researchers believe that their findings could offer a mechanism for the further decline of NMJ and skeletal muscle when satellite cells are depleted and neuromuscular disruption occurs.
Opioid drugs are strong painkillers that work by activating µ-opioid receptors (µORs), but their adverse effects including addiction and respiratory depression, have led to the search for alternative pain relief strategies. Researchers have found that the activation of µORs in peripheral nerve endings produces meaningful analgesic effects by inhibiting the pro-nociceptive TRPM3 channels, a divalent-permeable cation channel. Pharmacological antagonizing TRPM3 may provide an analgesic strategy with reduced adverse effects. TRPM3 channels are inhibited by reputable µOR agonists that are structurally different, and the effects are rapid and readily reversible upon cessation of agonist treatment. The researchers' findings suggest the importance of investigating TRPM3 channels as potential targets for the treatment of pain.
The human visual system creates a structured representation of the visual scene by selecting image elements that are part of behaviorally relevant objects. The mechanisms responsible for this process are only partially understood. In this study, the time-course of perceptual grouping was investigated by measuring the reaction times of human participants. The study found that attention spreads fastest over large and homogeneous areas and is slowed down at locations that require small-scale processing. A 'growth-cone' model was developed which selects surface elements in an incremental, scale-dependent manner. This model helps to explain the scale-dependent spread of object-based attention in the visual cortical hierarchy, leveraging different receptive field sizes in distinct cortical areas. The study also found that perceptual grouping may require a slow and serial process in some cases. Experiment 1 examined the time-course of perceptual grouping with wedge-shaped stimuli and found that the growth-cone model accounted for 86% of the variance in reaction times. In Experiment 1B, the influence of the distance between the fixation point and the cue on reaction time was investigated, and the growth-cone model was found to best explain the results.
A study has found that the global trade in amphibians is much larger than previously thought, with 1,215 species traded, 345 threatened and 100 unassessed. Many of these species are vulnerable due to gaps in regulation and small populations. The largest trade hotspots are in South America, China and Central Africa, though the trade also occurs in Southeast Asia, Madagascar and the Caribbean. The study combined data from online searches, CITES and other trade databases, and shows that the majority of traded species are taken from the wild. The authors argue that the scale and limited regulation of the trade warrants a re-examination of the wildlife trade status quo and renewed efforts to achieve global biodiversity goals.
Researchers have identified a protein called Drosophila ZIP13, previously thought to be a zinc importer, as the iron transporter responsible for delivering iron to the secretory compartments in cells. Failure of this process is likely the cause of a form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome characterised by abnormalities in collagen production. The fruit fly model used in the study demonstrated significant behavioural changes upon exposure to a diet with varied iron/zinc concentrations, with closer analysis revealing activity in the transport of zinc and iron by ZIP13.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to determine the structure of the Escherichia coli 70S ribosome with a global resolution of 2.0 Å. The maps reveal unambiguous positioning of protein and RNA residues, their detailed chemical interactions, and chemical modifications. The maps also reveal extensive solvation of the small (30S) ribosomal subunit and interactions with A-site and P-site tRNAs, mRNA, and the antibiotic paromomycin. The high quality of the maps should enable future structural analyses of the chemical basis for translation and aid the development of robust tools for cryo-EM structure modeling and refinement.
Researchers have developed an automated mathematical analysis to catalogue a range of realistic Turing networks which reveal that in the presence of cell-autonomous factors, networks can form a pattern with equally diffusing signals and even for any combination of diffusion coefficients. Such networks allow for the understanding of multicellular pattern formation and help enable the development of synthetic patterning systems for use in synthetic biology and regenerative medicine. The analysis also showed that 70% of the identified networks with non-diffusible nodes are of Type II and Type III, indicating that the differential diffusivity requirement is unexpectedly rare in most cases.
Researchers have found that humans and chimpanzees share a generally conserved response to hypoxia, a common factor in cardiovascular disease (CVD). They used induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes to conduct in-depth inter-species comparisons of gene regulatory response to hypoxia. During the study, researchers found species-specific regulatory responses, with 1,920 genes responding to hypoxia in both species, 147 genes responding to hypoxia in one species but not the other, and 430 genes responding differently between the two species. The research could help researchers better understand the mechanisms that underlie disease susceptibility.
The document discusses an assay to measure the activity of neuronal GIRK2 channels in response to G protein concentration in mouse dopamine neurons. The study shows that four Gβγ subunits are required to open GIRK2 channels, and that intracellular Na+ increases Gβγ affinity, which amplifies opening. The study concludes that GIRK2 mediates a form of neuronal inhibition that is amplifiable in settings of excess electrical activity. The study also discusses the difficulty of accurately measuring components in living cell membranes and describes a method for controlling G protein concentration in planar lipid membranes to investigate the regulation of neuronal GIRK2 channel gating. The study explored the relationship between Gβγ, Na+, and GIRK2 channel activity and estimated the membrane concentration of Gβγ subunits that appear in mouse dopamine neuron membranes upon stimulation of GABAB receptors.
This document outlines a study of the Alphaproteobacteria, a diverse and ancient group of bacteria that includes the mitochondrial lineage. Previous attempts to infer the group's phylogeny have been challenged by methodological artifacts, and the authors of this study attempted to overcome these by analyzing 200 single-copy and conserved genes and employing a variety of strategies to reduce compositional biases. By doing so, they discovered that the Rickettsiales and Holosporales, both groups of intracellular parasites of eukaryotes, are not sisters to each other, but instead, the Holosporales has a derived position within the Rhodospirillales. They incorporate these and other insights about the group into an updated taxonomy. The study of the Alphaproteobacteria is fundamental to understanding how streamlined bacteria, intracellular parasitic bacteria, or mitochondria evolved from their alphaproteobacterial ancestors.
The study investigated whether plasticity of individual neurons in the inferior temporal cortex underlies human core object recognition changes induced with unsupervised visual experience. A single-neuron plasticity model was built to predict human learning effects, which largely predicted the direction, magnitude, and time course of human performance changes. The study found that unsupervised temporal contiguity experience may play a crucial role in the construction of tolerant core visual object recognition in humans and non-human primates. The study provides evidence that the ventral visual stream is reshaped under continual pressure via unsupervised visual experience. The overall working hypothesis is that tolerant core object recognition is instructed at least in part by naturally occurring unsupervised temporal contiguity experience.
A study has identified 44 “muscle regionally expressed genes” (mRGs) in planarian flatworms that could help understand how animals maintain their tissue identity during cell turnover and regeneration. The team performed single-cell RNA sequencing on muscle cells from 10 distinct anterior-posterior regions of the planarian AP axis and found mRGs distributed mainly amongst three gene families: Wnt-signaling components, Hox-family transcription factors and fibroblast growth factor receptor-like proteins (FGFRL). The study also revealed that two FGFRL-Wnt circuits  are required for trunk and head patterning. Inhibition of some genes did not affect the capacity of animals to regenerate, but instead impacted the outcome of regeneration, as regeneration of heads rather than tails occurred for example. 

The protein complex cohesin is responsible for holding together sister chromatids and is involved in chromosome organization, DNA repair and transcriptional regulation. Cohesin contains a ATPase domain made up of two active sites, Smc1 and Smc3, which are required for cohesin to bind to DNA. This binding activity is promoted by Eco1 acetyltransferase and inhibited by Wpl1. After cohesin binds DNA, a second step is required for DNA tethering, which is regulated by cohesin ATPase. Cohesin's ATPase activity is stimulated by the Scc2/Scc4 complex and is necessary for its DNA binding. The hypothesis is that Scc2/Scc4 stimulates ATP hydrolysis to open the cohesin ring and allow the entry of DNA. Once cohesin is stably bound to DNA, its ATPase activity is suppressed to prevent ring reopening and DNA escape. The acetylation of Smc3 by Eco1 not only stabilizes cohesin binding to DNA but also modulates the cohesin ATPase cycle to promote a state that is permissive for DNA tethering and resistant to Wpl1 inhibition. Cohesion is a two-step process whereby cohesin first associates with DNA in a stable form and then undergoes a second transition to tether sister chromatids together. The ATPase domain of cohesin plays a role after the initial stable DNA binding of cohesin in the regulation of DNA tethering. Once stably bound to DNA, cohesin's ATPase activity uncouples from its DNA binding and tethering activities. Eco1 promotes cohesion by slowing or trapping the ATPase cycle of DNA-bound cohesin to promote a state that is permissive for DNA tethering.
Researchers have found that mutations in the NF1 gene increase numbers of erythroid progenitors in the yolk sac, but also inhibit the specification of hemogenic endothelium in the dorsal aorta. The study also showed that hyperactive Ras signalling increases cardiac blood island formation. The research suggests that the phenotypic hematopoietic cells in the blood islands are functional erythroid and myeloid progenitors.
A study in eLife journal has identified how sticklebacks, a fresh water species of fish, have evolved according to the surrounding environment. Sticklebacks in fresh water environments have less armour than their stickleback counterparts living in salt water environments, due to repeated changes in their DNA. A simple genetic system is responsible for the differences in armour between these fish and it is now believed that reductions in expression of the freshwater allele in particular tissues are responsible. These genetic changes observed in sticklebacks in this study suggest how animals can quickly adapt to the ever-changing environment.
A study on mice tendons shows high levels of cell proliferation during early postnatal stages, which declines significantly after one month of age. However, a small population of tendon cells continues to proliferate at a very low rate in adult and aged stages. The study used complementary methods of genetic pulse-chase labeling and BrdU incorporation to trace the cell division history and detect proliferation. The results demonstrate that tendons harbor significant postnatal mitotic activity and suggest the presence of resident tendon progenitor populations with important therapeutic implications for tendon injuries.
The article discusses a study that examines the relationship between electric field (EF) and volume changes in the brain of patients who underwent electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) for depression. The study found that EF-induced volume changes were localized to specific regions of the brain, particularly the left amygdala and left hippocampus, but did not have a significant effect on antidepressant response. The study concludes by highlighting the need for further research to understand the mechanisms of action and clinical consequences of EF-induced volume changes.
This article discusses the evolution and biosynthesis of specialized metabolites in plants, focusing on the production of acylsugars in the Solanaceae family. The researchers identify a gene cluster on tomato chromosome 7 that is involved in medium chain acylsugar accumulation in glandular trichomes, which co-localizes with a tomato steroidal alkaloid gene cluster and is syntenic to a chromosome 12 region containing another acylsugar pathway gene. The study also investigates the cell-type specific gene expression and metabolic diversity of acylsugars, and identifies primary metabolic enzymes that have been co-opted into specialized metabolism. The article suggests that the stepwise recruitment of pathway enzymes and the assembly of multi-enzyme specialized metabolic pathways are still not well understood in plants.
The traditional approach to cultivating microorganisms in the lab is labor-intensive and low-throughput, and often biases samples towards fast-growing organisms. A new microfluidic platform has been developed that isolates and cultivates microbial cells in picoliter droplets, automatically sorting them based on colony density to enhance slow-growing organisms. This method has been applied to fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) donor stool using multiple growth media, and has shown to increase taxonomic richness and representation of rare and clinically relevant taxa, as well as detecting antibiotic-resistant strains that traditional plate-based cultivation missed. The method enables rapid and efficient screening for antibiotic-resistant microbes in donor stool samples and improves the safety of fecal microbial transplant treatments. This microfluidic platform presents a promising alternative for high-throughput anaerobic cultivation, allowing for increased throughput and accuracy of cultivating pure strains from anaerobic environments.
Researchers have developed a new method of profiling chromatin accessibility in individual cell types without the need for cell-sorting. The Cell-type-specific chromatin accessibility profiling using targeted DamID (CATaDa) approach is a reliable and reproducible method for investigating chromatin states, and allowed the team to identify functional cell-type-specific enhancers and novel motifs enriched at different stages of development in the Drosophila fruit fly. Compared to their differentiated progeny, somatic stem cell Dam-methylation signals are more widely distributed across the genome, indicating a greater level of global chromatin accessibility.
The Hsp104 chaperone is essential in yeast for recovering proteins from aggregates and for tolerance to stress. It functions as a hexamer, and is powered by ATP hydrolysis, but its effectiveness may be limited by ADP, which has a strong inhibitory effect. The Hsp70 chaperone is shown to support Hsp104 binding to aggregates and to disordered protein substrates, and the process is also shown to facilitate binding of ATP, strongly stimulating ATPase activity of the disaggregase in the presence of ADP. These findings raise new questions about how protein recovery from aggregates is regulated by Hsp104 and its chaperone partner Hsp70.
The study examines the role of the human tumor suppressor gene ARF in zebrafish fin regeneration. The researchers introduced the regulatory and coding sequences of ARF into the zebrafish genome and found that it was dormant during development and uninjured adult fins, but was highly expressed during epimorphic fin regeneration after amputation. The activation of ARF inhibited regeneration but did not affect growth and development, indicating a distinct tumor suppressor response to regenerative versus developmental environments. The study suggests that the presence of ARF could impact regenerative capacity and that inducing epimorphic regeneration clinically would require modulation of ARF-p53 axis activation. The analysis of the Ink4b-Arf-Ink4a locus in different vertebrate genomes also reveals that ARF is poorly conserved in non-mammalian lineages and absent in highly regenerative species.
A data-driven model has been developed to identify new vectors of the Zika virus. The model identifies 35 species, seven of which are found in the continental United States including Culex quinquefasciatus and Cx. pipiens. Empirical studies are needed to confirm the predictions of vector competence for these species, which could help identify populations at risk of transmission within the United States. The outbreak of the Zika virus in Brazil in 2015 and 2016 was correlated with an increase in newborn microcephaly, leading to the World Health Organization declaring the epidemic a public health emergency of international concern. Prior to the spread of the virus to the Americas, identifying additional competent vector species was not a priority due to the virus historically being restricted to a narrow region of equatorial Africa and Asia. However, with its recent rapid expansion into the Americas and its association with severe neurological disorders, the prediction of potential disease vectors in non-endemic areas is now of critical public health importance.
The extinct giant caimanine Purussaurus had a unique and previously unknown sacral count of three, with two true sacral vertebrae and one functional dorsosacral. This deviation from the usual vertebral count found in crocodylians has implications for its biomechanical demands in supporting its large body size. The study also provides a detailed description of the specimen's pectoral and pelvic girdle bones. It is suggested that the low evolutionary rates of crocodylians may explain their comparatively conserved body plans. The study provides new character scoring and phylogenetic analysis for Purussaurus mirandai, expanding our understanding of the morphological diversity of this extinct species.
Scientists are investigating the hypothesis that the wide variety of proteins in nature came from a small number of ancestral peptides active as co-factors in RNA-dependent replication and catalysis. They propose that contemporary domains still contain remnants of these peptides which can be reconstructed by a comparative approach similar to that used to reconstruct ancient vocabularies. By comparing domains representative of known folds, they have identified 40 fragments which suggest a common descent among domains not thought to be homologous, and propose they represent remnants of a primordial RNA-peptide world. They suggest that most present-day proteins' origins can be attributed to combinatorial shuffling and differentiation events using a basic set of domain prototypes. Many of these domains can be traced back to the time of the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA). The scientists propose that the first folded domains arose by repetition, fusion, recombination and accretion from an ancestral set of peptides that emerged in the RNA world, in which RNA served both as carrier of genetic information and catalyst of metabolic reactions.
The Melanocortin Receptor Accessory Protein 2 (MRAP2) has been identified as a regulator of energy homeostasis that is expressed in tissues that do not express MC4R. The deletion of MRAP2 does not recapitulate the phenotype of Mc4r KO mice and therefore other G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are likely to be regulated by MRAP2. The study identified the Prokineticin Receptor 1 (PKR1) as the first non-melanocortin GPCR to be regulated by MRAP2, with MRAP2 inhibiting PKR1 signalling. MRAP2 and PKRs expression overlap in several organs and both PKR1 and MRAP2 mRNA were detected in the hypothalamus, which was relevant as they were found to co-localise in a large number of cells in the arcuate nucleus.  Bi-molecular fluorescence complementation assays confirmed that PKR1 and MRAP2 can interact in live cells.
The study examines how context is represented in the cortical network of the brain, and how it is communicated within the brain network during sensory and mnemonic forms. The researchers used electrocorticography to measure large-scale neuronal activity from monkeys observing videos of agents interacting in situations with different contexts, and extracted five context-related network structures including a bottom-up network during encoding and, shortly after, cue-dependent retrieval of the same network with the opposite top-down connectivity. The study provides a general methodology for recording and analyzing cortical network neuronal communication during cognition.
A study on lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from individuals with type 1 diabetes with and without retinopathy revealed differential gene expression in response to high glucose. The genes with the largest difference in glucose response were assessed for association with diabetic retinopathy in a genome-wide association study meta-analysis, and an enrichment of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) from the glucose response genes among small association p-values was identified. Folliculin (FLCN) was identified as a susceptibility gene for diabetic retinopathy, with increased FLCN expression having a direct positive effect on retinopathy. The study suggests that integrating genetic association with gene expression can be a powerful approach to identify susceptibility genes for diabetic retinopathy.
The article discusses how the nematode C. elegans responds to surface exposure, which they perceive as a threat, by altering their global organismic state. The article describes how the O2-sensing neurons in the nematode activate the RMG interneurons, causing sustained locomotory arousal, and alter the expression of neuropeptides, metabolic enzymes, and other non-neural genes. The article also discusses how global organismic states are poorly understood but involve the recruitment of many brain circuits whose individual activities are dynamically assembled to address the circumstances faced by the animal. The article examines how O2-sensing neurons evoke a change in the global state of C. elegans in response to 21% O2 and the genes involved in this process. The article also describes how the findings can provide insights into subjective behaviors such as fear, aggression, and hunger.
The study investigated the dynamics of visual imagery using magnetoencephalography (MEG) in human participants. The results showed that compared to perception, imagery decoding becomes significant later, and the entire visual representation is activated at once during imagery. The study also found consistent overlap between imagery and perceptual processing around 160 ms and from 300 ms after stimulus onset. This indicates that the N170 gets reactivated during imagery and that imagery does not rely on early perceptual representations. The study revealed a very clear temporal overlap profile between perception and imagery, which was consistent throughout the imagery period. The complete overlap with perception was already present at the onset of imagery.
Researchers have used ancient DNA from herbarium samples to identify the cause of the potato late blight epidemic that led to the Irish potato famine. The findings suggest that a unique genotype, HERB-1, caused the
A study on the Toxoplasma gondii parasite and its relationship to its natural host, the mouse, has been conducted. The virulence of this parasite appears paradoxical because its rapid replication and spread results in the death of the host before the parasite encysts and completes its life cycle. It has been found that Toxoplasma gondii strains can secrete kinases and pseudokinases that inactivate the mouse's immunity-related GTPases (IRG proteins), which are responsible for the mice's resistance to avirulent strains. As a result, certain mice have shown an IRG haplotype that can confer resistance against virulent strains of Toxoplasma gondii. In turn, virulent strains can encyst in these hosts, providing an explanation for the evolution of virulence polymorphism in Toxoplasma gondii. The study has also revealed that the IRG resistance system in mice has a scale of polymorphic complexity comparable to the MHC, which would generate host protein polymorphism. Finally, the study has found that the polymorphism in the IRG system estimated by Tajima's π from seven mouse strains resembles that of classical MHC genes.
The document discusses the use of reward-based training for recurrent neural networks, which can provide insights into the circuit mechanisms of cognitive functions through analysis of network connectivity and activity. Unlike supervised learning, animals learn through reinforcement where reward feedback is provided for definite actions. Reward maximization is especially relevant when optimal behavior depends on confidence or subjective preferences. The trained networks show a strong resemblance to neural activity in behaving animals. This work provides a unified framework for investigating diverse cognitive and value-based computations, with reward being a necessary step towards elucidating the biological substrates of learning. The document also presents a simple perceptual decision-making task as an example of how an RNN can learn a behavioral policy for choosing actions to maximize cumulative reward.
During sleep, the thalamus generates a pattern of transient sleep spindle oscillations which synchronize the cortex. These spindles have been shown to be critical for sleep-dependent memory consolidation, but the neural mechanism for this process is not known. A recent study has shown that cortical spindles are organized in circular wave-like patterns which organize neuronal activity over tens of milliseconds, within the time-scale for storing memories in large-scale networks across the cortex via spike-time dependent plasticity. These circular patterns repeat over hours of sleep with millisecond temporal precision, allowing reinforcement of activity patterns through hundreds of reverberations. This provides a novel mechanistic account for how global sleep oscillations and synaptic plasticity could strengthen networks distributed across the cortex to store coherent and integrated memories. These findings could be useful in the development of therapies for memory disorders.
A team of scientists from Berlin and Nijmegen have developed a new method to study vesicle fusion and predict how change in synaptic connections will affect the brain. Vesicle fusion is an action in which neurotransmitters are released from a neuron’s axon into a synapse into which the axon communicates with another neuron. As explained in an article published in eLife, when a vesicle full of chemical neurotransmitters needs to release the neurotransmitters, it fuses with the plasma membrane of the axon, and there is a substantial energy barrier that needs to be overcome before these neurotransmitters can be released. The energy required to force through this barrier is known as activation energy. Understanding how the fusion reaction happens, and how much energy is required to make it happen, is fundamental to the study of the brain, and in this latest study, the researchers focus on this reaction. By analysing synaptic responses induced by hypertonic solutions, the team was able to assess various reactive states and demonstrate that complexinI/II deficiency or phorbol ester stimulation affect responses to hypertonic solution in a supralinear way.
The article discusses the properties of the RadA protein, found in almost all eubacteria and plants, and its role in homologous recombination. RadA is a DNA-dependent ATPase and can stimulate the branch migration phase of RecA-mediated strand transfer reactions. It cannot mediate synaptic pairing between homologous DNA molecules but can drive branch migration to extend the region of heteroduplex DNA, even without RecA. RadA stimulates branch migration within the context of the RecA filament, in the direction of RecA-mediated strand exchange. The article further describes the complex mechanisms by which organisms maintain genetic integrity, including the role of RecA nucleation onto ssDNA, loading and unloading of RecA, and regulation of RecA filament stability. The article also explores the biochemical properties of the E.coli RadA protein and several mutant forms, and how they affect recombination. Through various experiments detailed in the article, the authors conclude that RadA's ability to catalyze branch migration in the context of the RecA filament and its codirectionality with strand exchange distinguish it from other branch migration functions in E.coli, RecG, and RuvAB.
Researchers from the Icahn School of Medicine have identified a little-known collagen disorder as a common cause of short stature in Puerto Rican people. By screening the genetic data of 38,000 people in the BioMe biobank, the team was able to uncover elevated genetic relatedness and trace the condition back to the gene COL27A1. The gene affects collagen production, resulting in an equal split of homozygote and heterozygote occurrences of the disorder. The combination of family history information and medical records led the researchers to discover the link between the gene and the disease.

The development of colour patterns in zebrafish involves the precise positioning of different types of pigment cells in the skin, and the exact orchestration of cell movements, shape changes, and organization during metamorphosis. One type of iridophores, which are cells containing reflective guanine platelets, play a crucial role in the process by switching between the dense form of the light stripes and the loose form of the dark stripes. Mutants with interrupted dark stripes have been observed and these have been linked to truncations in the Tight Junction Protein 1a (ZO-1a), which is a regulator of cell shape changes during colour pattern formation and the first cytoplasmic protein implicated in this process. Further studies of the mutant and wild-type zebrafish have shown that the mutant melanophores can be distinguished from the wild-type melanophores at different stages of metamorphosis, and that melanophore numbers in mutant and wild-type fish do not differ significantly until stage ten.
Salmonella enterica, a bacterial pathogen that causes gastroenteritis and typhoid fever, can shift from a virulent systemic infection to a dormant carrier state by regulating its lifestyle between residing in host cells or existing as a surface-attached multicellular biofilm. This switch is achieved through the two-component regulatory system (TCRS) encoded on the SPI-2 pathogenicity island, especially through the activation of the transcriptional regulator SsrB. Under acidic macrophage vacuoles, SsrB~P relieves silencing of virulence genes and activates their transcription, whereas unphosphorylated SsrB directs transcription of factors required for biofilm formation by activating csgD and thereby disrupting silenced H-NS-bound promoters. Salmonella reservoirs colonize as biofilms on gallstones, intestinal epithelial cells, and tumors. Through these studies, SsrB, but not SsrA kinase, is identified as a new positive regulator of biofilm formation.
This study aimed to examine the time course of endocytosis of synaptic vesicles, which is the recycling process of the vesicle membrane and proteins after neurotransmitter release at the synapse. Using optical monitoring of single synaptic vesicle endocytosis in rat hippocampal neurons, the study identified three components of retrieval operating at ultrafast, fast, and ultraslow speeds. While increasing calcium slowed down the fast events, increasing temperature accelerated their time course. In contrast, the kinetics of ultrafast events were only mildly affected by these manipulations, suggesting that synaptic vesicle proteins can be retrieved with ultrafast kinetics. Overall, the study suggested that multiple endocytic pathways with different kinetics are operating at presynaptic terminals.
The article discusses the process through which the myofilaments in the cell cortex contract and fragment the actin filaments during cell division. The research used a minimal actin cortex to investigate the interaction between the filaments and showed that synthetic myofilaments compact the membrane-bound actin filaments while moving along them. The study proposed that tension builds up between the ends of myofilaments, resulting in compressive stress exerted on single actin filaments, causing their buckling and breakage. The fragmentation and compaction of actin filaments may contribute to actin turnover and cortex reorganization during cytokinesis. The study used microscopy and a theoretical model to investigate the process of myofilament breaking and compaction. These findings will have important applications in investigating various aspects of cell division and turnover.
The document discusses the neural and computational mechanisms behind the impact of social evaluation on self-esteem. The study used functional MRI and a computational model to explore how self-esteem is updated through prediction errors arising from social feedback. The results showed that there is a correlation between social prediction errors and the ventral striatum/subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, while updates in self-esteem are linked to activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. The study also found that enhanced insula-vmPFC connectivity during updating of self-evaluative beliefs may represent a marker for psychiatric vulnerability. In addition, the study indicates that low self-esteem is a vulnerability factor for various psychiatric problems. A novel social evaluation task was used to test participants' predictions about approval feedback from strangers. The study found that self-esteem changes were better explained by social prediction errors than outcome valence alone. The study also identified a dimension of "interpersonal vulnerability" that was associated with a range of psychiatric symptoms, including depression and social anxiety.
Researchers have found that using a chromatin donor template instead of a naked DNA donor template increases the efficiency of homology-directed repair (HDR) in cells, which would be useful for precise genome editing. Chromatin, which is the natural form of DNA in the nucleus, was found to increase the frequency of HDR-edited clones, as well as homozygous editing. The use of a chromatin donor template was tested in conjunction with the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 system, and resulted in a higher efficiency of HDR-mediated GFP insertion, particularly in the targeted insertion of DNA fragments containing the coding regions of genes. The use of chromatin donor templates also resulted in an increase in the efficiency of homozygous editing in diploid and aneuploid cells. Chromatin donor templates were found to have low cytotoxicity in cell transfection experiments. The researchers suggest that the natural form of DNA in the nucleus is the preferred substrate for factors that mediate homologous recombination in cells, and that these findings will advance the utility of precise genome editing in basic, translational, and clinical research.
A new mammarenavirus has been found in Southeast Asia, along with a genetic variant of WenZhou virus, which is believed to have originated in China. The discovery of these viruses, which are known to cause mild illness in humans and are primarily rodent-borne, highlights the potential for widespread zoonotic transmission in the region. The new virus has been named Loei River mammarenavirus after the region where it was discovered, and the genetic variant has been named Cardamones after a nearby chain of mountains. The discovery highlights the importance of identifying pathogens in environments heavily utilized by humans to prevent and control emerging infectious diseases.
Researchers have used genetically-directed sparse labeling to characterize the complete morphologies of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in mice, which are severely affected in Alzheimer's disease. The cholinergic system in the brain modulates neuronal excitability and vascular tone throughout the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, and is of special interest because it degenerates in a variety of common neurologic diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. However, defining the full morphologies of individual basal forebrain cholinergic neurons has been technically beyond reach until now, due to their large axon arbor sizes. The researchers also found that cholinergic axons were slowly lost and there was an accumulation of axon-derived material in discrete puncta in an Alzheimer's disease model. The loss of forebrain cholinergic innervation in Alzheimer's disease has stimulated the development of pharmacotherapy to enhance cholinergic signaling as an approach to partially ameliorate cognitive symptoms.
The termination of messenger RNA translation in Bacteria and Archaea is initiated by release factors (RFs) 1 or 2 recognizing a stop codon in the ribosomal A site and releasing the peptide from the P-site transfer RNA. RF-dissociation is facilitated by the G-protein RF3. This study provides a cryo-EM structure of a post-termination ribosome containing both apo-RF3 and RF1, providing structural keys to the mechanism of guanine nucleotide exchange on RF3 and an L12-mediated ribosomal recruitment of RF3. RF3, along with initiation factor 2 (IF2), elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), and elongation factor G (EF-G), constitute a set of four major translational GTPases. A stable complex was created with RF1 and RF3, but not RF3•GDP, and was subjected to cryo-EM and single-particle-based reconstruction. The resultant structure showed domain 3 of apo-RF3 interacts with domain 1 of RF1 and extends toward the spur of the 30S subunit.
The document discusses the development of sympathetic innervation in mouse inguinal subcutaneous white fat (iWAT) and its association with beige adipocytes. It was found that the density of sympathetic parenchymal neurites in close apposition to beige adipocytes is dependent on PRDM16. The study also determined the timing of the interactions between sympathetic neurites and beige adipocytes in iWAT, and found that sympathetic parenchymal innervation in iWAT actively grows during the early postnatal period and overlaps with early postnatal beige adipogenesis. The emergence of dense parenchymal neurites surrounding adipocytes was observed from P10 onwards. The study also discusses the crucial role of adipose tissue in energy balance and how beige adipocytes interact with the sympathetic nervous system to drive thermogenesis.
A recent study published in eLife illustrates how gene co-expression analysis can provide valuable insights into the transcriptional basis of cellular identity, revealing novel mechanisms of incisor renewal. The adult mouse incisor is used as a model for a continuously renewing organ, and co-expression analysis has demonstrated potential to define populations of incisor epithelial and mesenchymal stem cells within the proximal incisor region. The method is based on the concept that different cell types express different genes and the abundance of a given cell type, meaning that transcript levels of genes that are specifically and consistently expressed by a cell type, will appear highly correlated when measured over a large number of biological replicates.
Scientists have developed a computational theory of how memories are modified by exploring the structure learning mechanism which discovers the units of association in a stream of experience. Retrieving a memory can modify its influence on subsequent behaviour, with modification of a memory trace occurring through classical associative learning. The theory focuses on Pavlovian conditioning because it offers some of the most elementary and well-studied examples, but the process can be observed in other types of learning. The theory's two interacting sub-systems are an associative-learning system that updates a set of conditioned stimulus-unconditioned stimulus associations using a delta rule to update weights, and a structure learning system that updates an approximation of the posterior distribution over latent causes using Bayes' rule.
Scientists have discovered that the essential function of actin, an intracellular protein found in cells, is determined by its nucleotide sequence rather than its amino acid sequence. The two closest actin isoforms, β and γ, are almost identical but vary due to silent substitutions affecting approximately 40% of their codons. β-actin is critical to cell migration and mouse embryogenesis, and its knockout leads to early embryonic lethality in mice. However, a study using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing found that the amino acid sequence of actin is not required for its essential function in the survival and health of mice. The study also showed that γ-actin protein can fully substitute for β-actin protein in this absence of β-actin. The study concludes that actin isoforms are regulated by "silent code," which controls the functional diversity of protein isoforms.
Researchers have identified the MICOS complex as the primary determinant of mitochondrial inner membrane structure. Through examining the functional roles and organization of MICOS, the researchers discovered two independent MICOS subcomplexes (Mic27/Mic10/Mic12 and Mic60/Mic19), and identified that the MICOS subcomplexes independently localize to cristae junctions and are connected via Mic19, which functions to regulate subcomplex distribution and cristae junction copy number. The researchers found that mitochondrial defects resulting from MICOS loss are caused by misdistribution of respiratory complexes in the inner membrane. The proper differentiation of the mitochondrial inner membrane into separate domains is critical for mitochondrial function. The newly identified MICOS complex has been proposed to act as a master regulator/integrator of mitochondrial inner membrane shape and organization.
The study aimed to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-inflammatory nature of apoptosis. The researchers found that AMP accumulated in the supernatant of apoptotic cells in a Pannexin1-dependent manner and that the culture supernatant of apoptotic cells activated macrophages to express anti-inflammatory genes, such as Nr4a and Thbs1. The team identified AMP as the molecule responsible for this gene expression, which was converted to adenosine by an ecto-5’-nucleotidase expressed on macrophages. The adenosine then activated a set of anti-inflammatory genes in macrophages via the A2a adenosine receptor. Mice that were deficient in this receptor or Pannexin1 showed prolonged peritonitis following intraperitoneal zymosan injection, indicating that the AMP released from apoptotic peritoneal cells exerted an anti-inflammatory effect by activating the A2a adenosine receptor.
New research has been conducted on how the cochlear amplifier enhances hearing sensitivity. The study, which measured sub-nanometer vibrations directly from outer hair cells using a custom-built heterodyne low-coherence interferometer, found that the reticular lamina vibration occurred after, not before, the basilar membrane vibration. This suggests that outer hair cells enhance hearing sensitivity through a global hydromechanical mechanism, rather than through a local mechanical feedback as commonly supposed. The study also found quantitative differences between gerbil and mouse cochleae. These results provide insight into the timing of the cochlear feedback and the mechanics of hearing sensitivity.
This study presents a comprehensive, experimentally validated regulatory network model for haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs). The model was constructed using ChIP-Seq, transgenic and reporter gene experimental data, and focused on nine major HSPC regulators. Candidate regulatory regions were selected based on the binding of at least three transcription factors and subsequent in vivo validation of candidate regulatory regions revealed potential mechanisms for cell state stabilization, and also how a leukaemogenic transcription factor fusion protein perturbs key HSPC regulators. This approach should help to improve the understanding of both normal physiological and disease processes, and provide possible molecular mechanisms underlying highly complex biological processes.
Researchers have found that certain RNA interference (RNAi)-active sequences in the genome can kill cancer cells by targeting multiple survival genes. Specifically, siRNAs and shRNAs designed to target CD95 or CD95L induce a unique form of off-target effect that kills cancer cells through simultaneous activation of multiple cell death pathways. This effect was found to be preferential for cancer stem cells and transformed cells. Tests showed that Dicer and Drosha-deficient cells, which lack most miRNAs, are hypersensitive to the RNAi-induced cell death. The researchers propose that specific toxic RNAi-active sequences present in the genome can be used to kill cancer cells.
The PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is important for controlling transposon expression in animal germ cells to ensure genome stability over generations. In Drosophila, piRNAs are inherited through the maternal lineage and control transposon expression in the germ cells of offspring. Maternally inherited Piwi protein also enters somatic nuclei in early embryos and persists for roughly half of the time required for embryonic development, suggesting a potential role in regulating the somatic chromatin structure during early embryogenesis. This is supported by a recent study that utilized a conditional protein degradation strategy to investigate the function of maternally deposited piRNAs during Drosophila embryonic development. The study found that rapid and efficient degradation of maternally deposited Piwi protein led to earlier and increased activity of zygotically expressed transposons in concert with loss of repressive marks during the affected developmental stages. The study suggests that the piRNA pathway indeed plays a role in regulating the somatic chromatin structure during early embryogenesis.
Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) are benign tumors that impact the health of many women, and their treatment can be expensive and invasive. Previous studies have established that genetic factors play a role in the development of fibroids, but few clear predisposing genes have been identified. A recent study performed a genome-wide association study on over 15,000 fibroid cases and identified 22 loci that were significantly associated with fibroid susceptibility. These genes could be grouped into two biological processes: those involved in genome stability and those relevant for genitourinary development. The study also found that the risk of fibroid development varied by ethnicity, with those of African ancestry having the highest risk. The study sheds new light on the genetic factors influencing fibroid development and could ultimately lead to improved treatments.
Researchers have identified a neuronal circuit in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans that processes information perceived by sensory neurons to control the induction of hydrogen peroxide defenses. The circuit allows the worm to lower its defenses upon sensing the presence of bacteria that can provide protection. The study found that the two ASI sensory neurons of the amphid, the major sensory organ of the nematode, initiate a multistep hormonal relay that decreases the nematode's hydrogen peroxide defenses. The circuit enables the nematodes to avoid the energetic cost of unneeded protection and shows the first example of a multicellular organism modulating its defenses when it expects to freeload from the protection provided by molecularly orthologous defenses from another species.
This study focuses on the organization, ultrastructure, and maintenance of longitudinal lanceolate complexes, which serve as mechanosensory end organs in mouse hairy skin. These structures are made up of unique combinations of low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs) and their associated terminal Schwann cells (TSCs). The study shows that TSC processes at hair follicles are tiled and that individual TSCs host axonal endings of more than one LTMR subtype. The study also found that Schwann cell ablation leads to loss of LTMR terminals at hair follicles, while TSCs remain associated with hair follicles following skin denervation in adult mice and become re-associated with newly formed axons, indicating a TSC-dependence of lanceolate complex maintenance and regeneration in adults. The study also explores the different hair follicle subtypes and their unique combinations of LTMR endings, playing neurophysiologically distinct roles in mechanosensory transduction. Guard hairs are associated with Aβ RA-LTMR lanceolate endings, while awl/auchene hairs are triply innervated by inter-digitated Aβ RA-, Aδ-, and C-LTMR lanceolate endings, and zigzag hair follicles are innervated by inter-digitated Aδ- and C-LTMR lanceolate endings. The study also shows that individual TSCs associated with different hair follicle types have different morphologies and densities of TSCs, indicating unique mechanotransduction functions for each hair follicle subtype in detecting hair movements.
Researchers have discovered that a CUL3-based ubiquitin ligase complex, which includes SPOPL, regulates endocytic trafficking and MVB formation (multivesicular bodies), by ubiquinating and degrading EPS15 at endosomes. This in turn influences influenza A virus infection as well as degradation of EGFR and other EPS15 targets. The research also found that SPOPL associates with endosomes and is required for both the formation of MVBs and the endocytic host cell entry of the flu virus. The researchers identified a critical substrate ubiquinated by CUL3-SPOPL as EPS15, an endocytic adaptor that also associates with the ESCRT-0 complex members HRS and STAM on endosomes.
Cancer cells often contain genetic alterations in the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling network that can affect cell behavior. Researchers have shown that the temporal patterns of MAPK activity, referred to as signaling dynamics, can differentially regulate cell behavior. In this study, researchers used live-cell imaging to examine the effects of oncogene expression on signaling dynamics and how altered MAPK dynamics impact cell behavior in epithelial tissues. They found that the temporal patterns of MAPK activity can either promote or inhibit proliferation cell autonomously, and that sustained ERK activity, triggered by oncogene expression, can promote cell cycle arrest and migration. Additionally, sustained ERK activity can trigger signaling waves in neighboring cells, which is mediated by the membrane metalloprotease ADAM17 and EGFR activity. These signaling waves coordinate neighboring cell migration towards oncogenic cells and are required for oncogenic cell extrusion, which is a process that eliminates apoptotic cells or crowded cells to maintain homeostasis. These findings suggest that the temporal patterns of MAPK activity differentially regulate cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous effects of oncogene expression.
A recent study has shown that MBOAT7-driven acylation of lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI) lipids may suppress the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is common in obese individuals, and recent genome-wide association studies have identified a liver disease susceptibility locus (rs641738) within a linkage-disequilibrium block containing genes encoding MBOAT7 and TMC4. The rs641738 variant is associated with all major forms of liver injury, including NAFLD, alcoholic-liver disease (ALD), and viral hepatitis-induced fibrosis. MBOAT7 is a unique contributor to the Lands’ cycle, which is a series of phospholipase-driven deacylation and lysophospholipid acyltransferase-driven reacylation reactions that synergize to alter phospholipid fatty acid composition, creating membrane asymmetry and diversity. The study found that hepatic expression of MBOAT7 is suppressed in obese humans and rodents. Mboat7 loss of function was shown to be associated with accumulation of its substrate LPI lipids, and direct administration of LPI promotes hepatic inflammatory and fibrotic transcriptional changes in an Mboat7-dependent manner. These results reveal a novel role of MBOAT7-driven acylation of LPI lipids in suppressing the progression of NAFLD in the setting of high fat diet.
This document discusses the role of grammar in regulation of gene expression through transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). The document describes the use of a reporter assay library, which contains synthetic cis-regulatory elements and genomic regulatory sequences with comparable binding site configurations, to explore the role of grammar in regulation by four key transcription factors. The results suggest that in the genome, the overall occupancy of TFs is the primary determinant of activity, while aspects of grammar, such as the number and arrangement of binding sites, play a role in synthetic elements. The document also discusses different models of enhancer function and the importance of understanding the degree to which TFs function independently and how interactions between sites contribute to regulatory activity. The study found evidence for a grammar that is constrained by TFBS arrangement, including OCT4-SOX2 interactions, but was limited in its ability to detect other interactions. Overall, the document highlights the importance of understanding the role of grammar in regulation of gene expression in ESCs.
The study looks at how echolocating bats detect prey on surfaces, specifically through the use of acoustic cues. They used a novel acoustic tomography technique to convert echoes into visual representations and found that bats detect prey through changes in depth profile and an 'acoustic shadow' cast by prey. They propose that predators may look for disruptions to the resting surface (acoustic shadows) rather than forming search images for prey. The study also considers the effect of differently structured surfaces and prey size and shape on acoustic cues, and found that substrate roughness acts to conceal the moth echo. The study provides the first empirical evidence for 'acoustic camouflage' as an anti-predator defense mechanism.
This article describes a study that examined the role of Zap70 in the formation of the immunological synapse in T cells. Using a genetic model to inhibit the catalytic activity of Zap70, the researchers found that Zap70 plays a critical role in the redistribution of talin and signalling proteins during the formation of a stable synapse. Additionally, they found that CTLs lacking Zap70 catalytic activity lost the ability to clear actin into a ring at the distal supramolecular activation complex (dSMAC) of the synapse, which is necessary for cytotoxic functions.
The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) is responsible for monitoring kinetochore-microtubule attachment during mitosis. Bub1 and BubR1 are two paralogous proteins involved in
The ventral pallidum (VP) plays a critical role in the neural circuitry underlying reward-related behaviors, including relapse to drug and alcohol seeking. Neurons in the VP respond to a variety of reward-related stimuli, but there is little consensus on the primary role of VP in driving reward-seeking behaviors and how VP signaling contributes to these behaviors. This study investigated whether rat VP cue responses contribute similarly to the vigor of reward-seeking behaviors trained under Pavlovian versus instrumental contingencies. The results showed that cue-elicited activity in many VP neurons predicts the latency of instrumental reward seeking, but not of Pavlovian response latency. This suggests that VP encoding of and contributions to response vigor are specific to the ability of incentive cues to invigorate reward-seeking behaviors upon which reward delivery is contingent.
Premature infants are at high risk of gastrointestinal tract colonization by potentially harmful bacteria, which can lead to diseases such as necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). To investigate bacterial strain transmission among co-hospitalized premature infants, researchers reconstructed genomes of microorganisms colonizing each infant, assessed their metabolic potential, and compared the microbial communities of infants who did and did not develop NEC. They found that although potentially pathogenic bacteria of the same species colonized many infants, strains were usually distinct to each baby, suggesting significant barriers to bacterial transmission. The researchers demonstrate that strain-resolved comprehensive community analysis can be achieved on a medically relevant timeframe and that future developments should decrease analysis time.
The agricultural pest Drosophila suzukii, which lays eggs in ripe fruit unlike most Drosophila species that lay eggs in overripe fruit, has undergone changes in bitter taste perception, according to a study by researchers at Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The study found that bitter-sensing mutants of Drosophila melanogaster undergo a shift in egg-laying preference toward ripe fruit, and physiological responses to various bitter compounds are lost in D. suzukii. The researchers suggest that the adaptation of D. suzukii to ripe fruit has been accompanied by a loss of bitter responses. D. suzukii is a major agricultural pest that threatens fruit crops including strawberries, blueberries, peaches and cherries.
The study examines the temporal structure of neural representations of indirect sensory objects retrieved during reward-learning about direct objects in humans using magnetoencephalography (MEG). The research indicates that the neural representation of the indirect stimulus can be decomposed into at least two temporal components with distinct properties and these are retrieved at different times during the reward-learning phase. The retrieval of only one of these components correlates with a behavioral measure of the generalization of value across learned associations. The research highlights the importance of temporal structure within retrieved neural representations to their function and provides insight into the dynamics of representations during retrieval.
Female Aedes aegypti mosquitoes breed in containers of freshwater associated with human habitation, which is crucial for their offspring survival. The DEG/ENaC channel ppk301 and sensory neurons expressing ppk301 control egg-laying initiation and choice in Ae. aegypti. The ppk301-expressing cells respond to both water and salt, suggesting that ppk301 is instructive for egg-laying at low-salt concentrations, but ppk301-independent pathways inhibit egg-laying at high-salt concentrations. When ppk301 mutant females contact water, they do not lay eggs as readily as wild-type animals and are more likely to make aberrant decisions between freshwater and saltwater. Mosquitoes showed no significant preference between deionized water and dilute seawater up to 10%, but they showed a strong dose-dependent aversion to higher concentrations of seawater, with an IC50 of 12.25% seawater. Females showed near-complete aversion to 25-100% seawater. This behavior has consequences for offspring survival. The vast majority of wild-type and ppk301 heterozygous animals laid all their eggs within the first 2 days of being introduced into egg-laying vials, whereas ppk301 mutant animals showed increased variability in the time of egg-laying initiation and a tendency to spread egg-laying out over many days.
This document discusses the subcellular localization of the nitrate reductase complex, a major respiratory complex under anaerobiosis in E. coli, and its regulation in response to metabolic conditions. The complex's localization was found to be submitted to tight spatiotemporal regulation in response to metabolic conditions via a mechanism using the transmembrane proton gradient as a cue for polar localization. The formation of polar assemblies potentiates the electron flux through the complex. The dynamic subcellular localization is a critical factor in the control of respiration in bacteria. The proton concentration gradient is a critical cue for polar localization of this anaerobic OXPHOS complex.
Down syndrome is caused by trisomy of chromosome 21 and is associated with congenital heart defects (CHD), but the genetic causes of these defects are unknown. To identify the genes that cause DS phenotypes, including CHD, researchers generated a mapping panel of seven mouse strains, using chromosome engineering. By analysing the 3D morphology of the developing hearts in these strains, researchers narrowed down the critical region for CHD to a 4.9 Mb region of chromosome 16, which contains at least two dosage-sensitive loci required in three copies to cause CHD. Furthermore, the analysis showed that CHD in DS is not caused by failure in the formation or growth of the dorsal mesenchymal protrusion (DMP).
A study has found that serotonin, a chemical in the brain, not only regulates the impact of costs, such as delay or punishment, on action selection, but it also regulates the cost of effort associated with producing actions. Participants who were administered the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor drug escitalopram produced more effort and achieved a higher financial reward compared to those who were given a placebo. By analysing the effects of serotonin on the study's participants, researchers were able to clarify the effects of such drugs on motivation, outside of psychopathology, and to reconcile these effects with the role of serotonin in the sensitivity to costs versus benefits.
Researchers used a novel network reconstruction algorithm to study patterns of viral transmission between patients and health care workers (HCWs) in the largest clusters of COVID-19 infection within the Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust during the first wave of the epidemic in the UK. They found that patients were much more likely to infect other patients compared to HCWs, and 21% of individuals caused 80% of transmission events, consistent with a pattern of superspreading. The study sheds light on the need for intensive infection control procedures in hospitals to reduce the spread of SARS-CoV-2. The researchers combined genetic and epidemiological data to infer networks of transmission events between individuals within the clusters and found that a small number of individuals were responsible for most infections observed. The study highlights the importance of contact between patients in the spread of the virus within a clinical environment.
The document discusses a study that used induced pluripotent stem cells to explore gene expression and splicing in multiple cell types exposed to various treatments. The study found that genetic effects on gene expression and splicing can be modulated by cellular and environmental factors, and identified variable allelic expression across contexts and different types of gene-environment interactions. The study highlights the importance of studying environment effects on gene expression in different cell types to avoid missing physiologically important cell type-treatment effects. The study also highlights the importance of exploring multiple treatments to reveal previously unrecognized regulatory loci that may be important for disease. The study identifies thousands of instances of allele-specific expression and partitions the variance in gene and allelic expression into individual, treatment, and cell type components, illustrating how each of these components can influence genetic control.
Researchers have discovered two spore killers, cw9 and cw27, from a strain of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The genes belong to the previously uncharacterized wtf gene family with 25 members in the reference genome. The killing activities of both spore killers can be uncoupled by mutation, and spores carrying one killer are protected from its killing effect but not that of the other killer. The wtf genes vary considerably between S. pombe isolates, indicating rapid divergence, and the researchers propose that they contribute to the extensive intraspecific reproductive isolation in S. pombe. The discovery provides an ideal model for understanding how segregation-distorting elements act and evolve.
Researchers have developed a single protein, LiCre, that can be controlled by blue light to induce genome manipulations. LiCre, which is made of a flavin-containing protein comprising the AsLOV2 photoreceptor domain of Avena sativa fused to a destabilized Cre recombinase, can be activated within minutes without additional chemicals. This system is more efficient than existing photoactivatable Cre recombinases based on two split units and can be used in yeast and human cells, providing cheap and precise spatiotemporal control of genetic switches.
Using fluorescence imaging in GCaMP6 reporter mice, the study generated retinotopic maps and identified additional regions of retinotopic organization in mouse neocortex, extending into barrel and retrosplenial cortices beyond the boundaries of mouse visual cortex. The study also found a mismatch between architectonic and retinotopic maps, and identified four visual areas bordering V1 - LM, P, PM, RL - which display complementary representations with overlap primarily at the central hemifield. The study showed that all three Emx1-GCaMP6 mouse lines displayed brighter fluorescence and faster fluorescence changes than wild-type mice. The study found that phase maps were consolidated into a visual field sign map and the retinotopic maps provide detail of the location and boundaries of individual visual regions.
The article describes the importance of the enzymatic protein Lsd1/KDM1a in the regulation and repression of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell genes during hematopoietic differentiation, and its role as an epigenetic governor of proper hematopoietic maturation. Lsd1 acts on enhancer and promoter regions through the removal of a specific methyl group on histone H3, and its loss can lead to severe defects in differentiation and pancytopenia. The article also discusses the different lysine methyl modifications and the opposing forces of lysine methyltransferases and lysine demethylases in regulating gene expression. The targeted deletion of Lsd1 in mice resulted in early embryonic lethality, but conditional inactivation during adult hematopoiesis also led
New research from the University of California studying Caenorhabditis elegans larvae has identified the gene ceh-24 as crucial to sleep, a behaviour found universally in animals with a nervous system. Scientists analysed the movement of muscle quadrants in C.elegans larvae using calcium imaging and optogenetics, which showed that the sublateral SIA neurons are required for flipping in larvae, a coordinated left-right turn.  Mutations of the ceh-24 gene were shown to strongly reduce flipping behaviour leading to the conclusion that it is required for such "sleep-associated" behaviour.
The recognition of Nod factors by LysM receptors is crucial for nitrogen-fixing symbiosis in legumes. In Lotus japonicus, only NFR1 and NFR5 and their closest homologs are known to be required, but here the authors show that an epidermal LysM receptor (NFRe) ensures robust signaling in L. japonicus, and has an active kinase capable of phosphorylating NFR5, which controls NFRe downstream signaling. NFRe-mediated idling state keeps the epidermal cells of the expanding root system attuned to rhizobia. NFRe is predicted to encode a LysM receptor protein with a typical intracellular kinase domain with the capacity to bind Nod factor, inducing a symbiotic signaling in planta when expressed in the nfr1-1 mutant from the 35S promoter. Homozygous mutant plants for NFRe formed significantly fewer nodules compared to wild type indicating its contribution to root nodule organogenesis.
Autocatalytic cycles, which require a metabolite to synthesize more of that metabolite, are essential for life and part of the core of central carbon metabolism. They present challenges in control and stability, as they require a delicate balance of enzyme levels and metabolite concentrations to prevent depletion of intermediate metabolites. This study analyzes small autocatalytic cycles in the context of metabolic networks and identifies unique constraints that shape the kinetic parameters of enzymes. The study shows that most reactions and metabolites in the core of central carbon metabolism are part of compact metabolic autocatalytic cycles. By understanding the requirements for stable operation of autocatalytic cycles, these findings can be applied to synthetic metabolic engineering applications.
This article discusses how the distinct motor programs of the nematode C. elegans are coordinated across behavioral states through neuromodulation. A new imaging platform was developed to simultaneously quantify each of the main C. elegans motor programs over hours or days, allowing for the analysis of whole-organism behavioral profiles. It was found that the motor programs coordinately change as animals switch behavioral states, and a dopamine pathway was identified that couples locomotion and egg-laying together across states. The study provides insights into how neuromodulators can couple motor circuits together in a state-dependent manner, and suggests that dopamine plays a central role in generating internal states. Unsupervised learning was also used to identify the long-lasting behavioral states that C. elegans animals generate, revealing the existence of posture groups characterized by back-and-forth transitions.
Researchers have discovered that children with autism struggle to integrate sensory information. The study, which was conducted on mice models, found that five autism related mice models displayed specific problems with delay eyeblink conditioning, a type of sensory learning that is associated with cerebellar plasticity. Scientists suggest that abnormalities of sensory processing in autism might interfere with cognitive development. The results are important because they highlight brain circuit mechanisms that are under-explored, and they could help researchers better understand the nature of autism.
The document discusses the evolution of coordinated collective motion in animal groups, particularly focusing on schooling fish. The authors develop an evolutionary model based on experimental data and analytical methods to investigate how populations evolve in unpredictable environments. They find that populations evolve toward a distinctive regime in behavioral phenotype space, where small changes in individual behavior cause spontaneous changes in the collective state of groups. These changes resemble phase transitions in physical systems and allow individuals to sense and respond to resource gradients via social interactions. The authors suggest that natural selection acting on selfish individuals leads to the highly effective collective responses evident in nature.
The Notch pathway in mammalian cells regulates cell survival and may activate autophagy, a cellular response to nutrient stress. In murine natural T-regulatory cells (Tregs), an immune subset controlling tolerance and inflammation, induction of autophagy required ligand-dependent Notch intracellular domain (NIC) activity. This controlled mitochondrial organization and survival of activated Tregs. Autophagy is a conserved catabolic process regulated by the evolutionarily conserved Atg/ATG family of proteins, and is implicated in the regulation of Treg function amongst other cell types. The study describes Notch1 signaling to autophagy in the context of activated Treg survival and consequences to Treg function. The transcription factor Foxp3 specifies Treg identity and, unlike in induced Tregs, in naturally arising Tregs, Foxp3 expression is developmentally regulated. The findings suggest that non-nuclear Notch-autophagy axis holds implications for Notch-regulated cell-fate decisions governing differentiation.
A study has identified a group of viral proteases that can activate human NLRP1, a complex which is a potent activator of inflammation, leading to activation of the NLRP1 inflammasome. Human NLRP1 can be activated by proteolysis when a tobacco etch virus protease site is engineered into the rapidly evolving linker region of human NLRP1 that is analogous to the site of lethal factor cleavage in mouse NLRP1B. Proteases from multiple genera of viruses can cleave and activate human NLRP1 and mouse NLRP1B at different sites. This suggests there is an evolutionary conflict between viral proteases and NLRP1.
A new approach to public health demand generation has been described in a document, using the example of voluntary medical male circumcision (VMMC) campaigns in Zimbabwe and Zambia. The technique involves psycho-behavioral segmentation to fine-tune interventions, tailoring them to the attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors of the groups in question. The document outlines six segments in Zimbabwe and seven segments in Zambia, and how the program should concentrate mainly on attracting the more committed uncircumcised men, particularly the “Enthusiasts.”
A study used a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen to identify genetic modifiers of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sensitivity in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutations. By applying a pooled lentiviral single guide RNA (sgRNA) library targeting 18,360 genes in HCC827 cells with constitutive Cas9 expression and treating them with erlotinib, the study identified 35 genes whose inactivation caused sensitization to EGFR TKIs and 47 genes whose inactivation conferred resistance to EGFR inhibition. The study confirmed that deleting RIC8A enhanced EGFR TKI-induced cell death, and that RIC8A is a positive regulator of YAP signaling. Furthermore, the study showed that knockout of ARIH2, a component in the Cullin-5 E3 complex, conferred resistance to EGFR inhibition in part by promoting nascent protein synthesis through METAP2. The study also found that LPAR antagonists, such as Compound 2, AM095, and Ki16425, synergized with EGFR inhibition to inhibit clonogenic cell growth, and that RIC8A deficiency leads to loss of Gα subunits.
Researchers have identified over 400 possible interacting and regulatory factors for heterochromatin, an essential component of eukaryotic genomes. The heterochromatin domain is defined molecularly by H3K9me2/3 and its binding protein HP1, and is vital for sister chromatid cohesion, chromosome pairing and segregation, and genome integrity. A genome-wide RNAi screen identified 30 proteins that localised to heterochromatin and suppressed position effect variegation (PEV) when mutated or depleted by RNA interference, revealing more about the spatial complexity and dynamic nature of heterochromatin composition and architecture. The findings lead the researchers to suggest that heterochromatin is composed of a dynamic network of subdomains.
The article discusses the role of the nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) in regulating the exchange of material between the nucleus and cytoplasm. It also focuses on the function of CRM1, an exportin that carries proteins and RNPs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The study identified over 700 export substrates from S. cerevisiae, ≈1000 from Xenopus oocytes and >1050 from human cells. The research also confirmed new CRM1 functions in spatial control of vesicle coat-assembly, centrosomes, autophagy, peroxisome biogenesis, cytoskeleton, ribosome maturation, translation, mRNA degradation, and precludes potentially harmful cytoplasmic pathways in the nuclear interior. The study also identified the role of CRM1 in selective nuclear exclusion and confirmed the back-sorting of cytoplasmic proteins from the nucleus. The article highlights the contribution of these findings to a better understanding of nucleocytoplasmic organization and the potential of CRM1 as a new basis for NES prediction.
A new approach for visualizing the 3D architecture of genomes using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) has been developed. The approach utilizes a multiplexed DNA FISH Oligopaint library that targets the entire Caenorhabditis elegans genome at chromosome, three megabase, and 500 kb scales. The library contains approximately nine suitable probe sequences per kilobase of the C. elegans genome and employs bridge oligos to couple detection oligos labeled with Alexa 488, Cy3, or Alexa 647 to primary probe sets, obviating the need for fluorescently labeling probes for each DNA FISH experiment. The approach allows visualization of genome organization at varying scales in all/most cells across all stages of development in an intact animal model system.
The process of hematopoiesis, or the formation of blood and immune cells, occurs during development through a process called the endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition (EHT). This process involves anisotropic contraction along the antero-posterior axis and oscillatory biomechanics, which are influenced by the mechanical forces exerted by blood flow. The zebrafish model has been used to study hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) and their migration to hematopoietic organs. The EHT allows single live cells to leave a squamous epithelium without perturbing its integrity. To understand the biomechanics of the EHT, researchers developed an algorithm to unwrap the aorta into 2D-cartography and performed live-imaging at high spatio-temporal resolution. They observed that the angles of emergence of EHT cells varied between approximately 0-45° from the dorso-ventral axis of the DA and 0-45° from its antero-posterior axis. EHT cells maintained contact with their endothelial neighbors until the end of the process. The distance between the two eGFP-ZO1 high-density regions decreased non-uniformly, with phases of contraction and relative stabilization accompanied by oscillations of the closing speed of relatively homogenous periodicity. Researchers also developed a specialized software tool to unwrap the signal of the roughly cylindrical cell layer of the aorta onto a plane to study in detail the EHT cellular landscape.
The Kinesin super family protein 2A (KIF2A) is involved in the regulation of cell migration, axon elongation, and pruning in the developing nervous system. When KIF2A is expressed postnatally, it is involved in regulating the development of the hippocampus and thus the establishment of precise postnatal hippocampal wiring. A study using tamoxifen-inducible Kif2a conditional knockout (Kif2a-cKO) mice showed that in the absence of KIF2A, the growth of many aberrant overextended dendrites developed axonal properties in the dentate granule cells (DGCs), leading to an epileptic hippocampus. KIF2A belongs to the kinesin-13 family, which destabilizes microtubules in an ATP-dependent manner. The loss of KIF2A resulted in an epileptic hippocampus in 3w-Kif2a-cKO mice. The mice showed weight loss, hyperactivity, twitching, and seizures. Importantly, the KIF2A expression was highly localized in the hilus and stratum lucidum of WT mice, where mossy fibers (MFs) were found, and the loss of KIF2A-induced MF sprouting (MFS) and aberrant recurrent excitatory circuits. MFS is often observed in the hippocampus of patients and animal models of temporal lobe epilepsy.
Researchers have developed a scalable, high-throughput method for generating, maintaining, and analyzing human midbrain organoids in standard 96-well plates. The resulting organoids display a highly homogeneous morphology, size, global gene expression, cellular composition, and structure, with significant features of the human midbrain and spontaneous aggregate-wide synchronized neural activity. The fully automated workflow enhances reproducibility and allows for drug assessment at the single-cell level within a complex 3D cell environment in a high-throughput-compatible format. The researchers believe 3D organoids have significant potential to provide more relevant predictions of drug efficacy and toxicity, particularly for diseases such as Parkinson's.
The discovery of a second skull of 'Ligulalepis' and micro-CT data on both specimens reveal novel anatomical features and cranial endocasts which have expanded our knowledge of early osteichthyan anatomy. New phylogenetic analyses place 'Ligulalepis' as a stem osteichthyan, specifically as the sister taxon to 'psarolepids' plus crown osteichthyans. The previous features considered to link Ligulalepis with actinopterygians are now considered generalized osteichthyan characters or of uncertain polarity. The precise position of 'psarolepids' is different between parsimony and Bayesian analyses. While the placement of 'Ligulalepis' as the earliest diverging stem actinopterygian requires only a single additional step, the evidence for an actinopterygian affinity is uncertain.
Scientists have developed a new computational framework for modeling microbial ecosystems that combines genome-based model construction with statistical analysis and calibration to experimental data. The framework was used to examine the dynamics of a community of Escherichia coli strains that emerged in laboratory evolution experiments. The team found that their approach yielded insight into the metabolic processes that drove bacterial diversification, including acetate cross-feeding and competition for organic carbon and oxygen. The framework offers a missing link towards a data-driven mechanistic microbial ecology. The tool can statistically evaluate models against data, analyze their sensitivity to varying parameters and estimate the uncertainty of model predictions in the face of stochasticity.
This study presents a method for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of all peptides presented by the HLA molecules, which play a critical role in immune-based therapies for intractable diseases such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, and infectious diseases. The study involves the use of mass spectrometry and the development of a workflow and open-source computational and data resource that enables the generation of HLA allele-specific peptide assay libraries and the analysis of quantitative digital maps of HLA peptidomes. The goal is to gain a more comprehensive and quantitative understanding of the human immunopeptidome and its dynamics in various disease states, which is becoming increasingly important in designing efficient immunotherapies. The methodology involves combining data-independent acquisition with a targeted data extraction strategy, along with the generation of high-quality assay libraries for extracting quantitative information from digital SWATH-MS data. This method represents the first community-based effort to develop a robust platform for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of the entire repertoire of peptides presented by HLA molecules.
The article discusses the different cell cycle responses in developing and mature organs after injury or during activated growth signaling. Specifically, the study focuses on the Drosophila hindgut pylorus and shows that injured larval pyloric cells undergo mitotic cycles, while injured adult pyloric cells undergo endocycles. The study identifies the cell cycle regulator Fizzy-related as the factor that determines whether the cell cycle response is mitotic or endocycles. The study also reveals that endocycles have a tissue-protective role and preserve epithelial architecture during sustained tissue growth signaling. The study introduces a new system, Dual-Expression-Method-for-Induced-Site-specific-Eradication (DEMISE), to finely control both injury and genetics in the system.
Researchers have developed a CRISPR sgRNA library of Interferon Stimulated Genes (ISGs) to identify IFN-induced HIV restriction factors, which inhibit the virus's replication by inducing antiviral effectors. Zinc Antiviral Protein (ZAP) was identified as inhibiting the vector and its knockout improved the performance of the screen. A small panel of IFN-induced HIV restriction factors, including MxB, IFITM1, Tetherin/BST2 and TRIM5alpha, were identified. The same host restriction factors that block cross-species transmission have been found to play a role in limiting the replication of highly-adapted HIV-1 in IFN-stimulated cells. The CRISPR screening method allowed for targeted gene knockout and a functional assay simultaneously across thousands of genes in a heterogeneous population of cells.
The widespread use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for malaria, particularly those targeting the histidine-rich protein 2 (PfHRP2) gene, has led to concerns over the selection of pfhrp2-deleted parasites which can cause false-negative results. This study uses a mathematical model to assess the potential for RDT-led diagnosis to drive the selection of pfhrp2-deleted parasites and identifies geographic regions that should be prioritised for surveillance. The study finds that low malaria prevalence and high frequencies of people seeking treatment result in the greatest selection pressure. The authors suggest that estimates of the prevalence of pfhrp2-deleted parasites prior to RDT introduction can be used to map predicted geographical regions where surveillance should be focused.
Researchers have established that sig-1Rs tonically inhibit extracellular vesicle (EV) release and that cocaine stimulates these EVs, making it a mechanism for 2-AG release in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). The data shows that sig-1Rs can control EV release via interaction with ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (ARF-6), and cocaine stimulating this process. The study also found that the Sig-1R agonists PRE-084 or fluvoxamine increased the marker of EV release from NG-108 cells in the absence of cocaine. The strong association between the Sig-1R and GDP-bound ARF6 suggests the chaperone region of the Sig-1R binds to the inactive form of ARF6 (GDP-ARF6), tonically inhibiting EV release.
This article presents a hypothesis that perception of external objects is a closed-loop dynamical process that encompasses loops that integrate the organism and its environment towards a steady-state. This is in contrast to the widely accepted open-loop scheme in which the interaction between the sensory organ and the environment is not affected by downstream neuronal processing. This closed-loop perception (CLP) process is proposed as an alternative to the open-loop perceptual (OLP) process doctrine. The article suggests that CLP is consistent with empirical data and can be synthesized in a robotic setup. Testable predictions are proposed for empirical distinction between open and closed loop schemes of perception.
This study aimed to understand the population structure and homeostatic processes of memory CD4 T cells in mice. Using a temporal fate mapping method and measuring the rates of influx of new cells and DNA labelling, the study found that both effector and central memory CD4 T cells consist of subpopulations with different rates of turnover. The study also revealed that the maintenance of CD4 T cell memory subsets is heavily reliant on the replenishment of new cells from the naive pool. The findings suggest that memory T cell populations are shaped by influx, cell division, and cell death, and highlight the need for a better understanding of how these processes are regulated in health and respond to chronic infections.
Proteins in the class II HLH family regulate transcription by heterodimerizing with class I HLH/E proteins. A new study has found that E proteins help sharpen neurogenesis by adjusting the strength of distinct proneural proteins. Inhibiting BMP signaling or its target ID2 impairs the neuronal production, but less severely from progenitors expressing NEUROG1/2/PTF1a than those expressing ATOH1/ASCL1. E proteins synergize with proneural proteins when acting on CAGSTG motifs, facilitating activity of ASCL1/ATOH1, which preferentially bind to such motifs. Conversely, E proteins restrict the neurogenic strength of NEUROG1/2 by directly inhibiting their preferential binding to CADATG motifs. Researchers propose this differential co-operation as a novel feature of their mechanism of action.
This study explores how humans and animals integrate sensory evidence to make decisions in natural settings. The study focuses on decision-making processes when subjects can choose when to make a decision and when sensory inputs have time-varying reliability. In the study, the researchers create a computational model that can accumulate evidence across both cues and time, and trade‐off accuracy with decision speed. The study concludes that subjects optimally accumulate evidence over time and across sensory modalities, even when the reaction time is under the subject's control. However, the study also finds that standard optimality metrics that ignore reaction times are sub-optimal when quantifying human behavior. The results show that optimizing decision-making in an uncertain environment requires the optimal use of all information available to the decision-maker.
Researchers have identified the cellular origins of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), the leading cause of global cancer deaths, and chronic lung diseases caused by smoking. The lineage-specific genes encoding epithelial proteins that support lung functions are disrupted by noxious agents and tobacco smoke that trigger KRAS mutations inducing LUAD in pulmonary cells. Club cells, present in the alveoli of mouse lungs, were found to survive KRAS mutations and facilitate alveolar repair and carcinogenesis after exposure to environmental noxious agents. This discovery could lead to targeting club cells to prevent the onset of chronic lung disease and premalignancy of LUAD. The study also found that airway epithelial cells have a robust role in carcinogenesis and alveolar regeneration, shifting from airway tracker expression to alveolar marker expression during carcinogenesis. The findings suggest that airborne carcinogens expand airway epithelial cells to alveolar regions either directly or through transient expression of alveolar markers during carcinogenesis.
Type II topoisomerases manage DNA supercoiling and aid chromosome segregation using a complex ATP-dependent duplex strand passage mechanism, while Type IIB topoisomerases and their homologs support both archaeal/plant viability and meiotic recombination. Topo VI, a prototypical type IIB topoisomerase, comprises two Top6A and two Top6B protomers. The subunits cooperate to engage two DNA segments and link ATP turnover to DNA transport, the process by which cells mitigate the topological challenges that impinge on DNA. Topo VI discriminates between linear and supercoiled DNA using an extensive and unanticipated DNA binding interface that specifically recognizes DNA crossings. ATP binding and hydrolysis by topo VI and many other enzymes that share its mechanisms of action are potentiated when recognizing such features.
A newly discovered neuronal circuit in Drosophila larvae allows them to overcome amino acid deprivation and develop into pupae. The circuit involves the class IV multidendritic cholinergic neurons sensing nutrient stress which is conveyed to glutamatergic neurons through mAChR. IP3R-dependent calcium transients in the glutamatergic neurons then convey this signal to downstream medial neurosecretory cells. The circuit ultimately regulates the expression of ecdysteroid biosynthetic genes. The study found that IP3R function is required to a greater extent in neurons located in the ventral ganglion for pupariation on protein-deprived diets. These findings provide insight into the neural mechanisms that regulate systemic responses to nutrient deprivation during development.
The article discusses the function and evolution of Fatty Acyl Reductases (FARs) in insects, particularly in bumble bees. FARs are involved in the biosynthesis of fatty alcohols that serve a range of biological roles. Insects typically have numerous FAR genes, with some being involved in pheromone biosynthesis. The article presents evidence of a massive expansion of the FAR gene family in Hymenoptera, presumably facilitated by transposable elements (TEs), which occurred in the common ancestor of bumble bees and stingless bees. FARs from the expanded FAR-A ortholog group contribute to the species-specific pheromone composition in bumble bees. The article also mentions that although gene duplication is hypothesized to be among the major genetic mechanisms of evolution, the biological significance of a large number of insect FAR paralogs remains unclear. The article highlights the need for more functional studies of FAR genes in insects to understand their biological roles.
Communication between neighboring tissues is essential for organ morphogenesis. During heart tube assembly, interactions with the adjacent endoderm control the medial movement of cardiomyocytes, known as cardiac fusion. However, the molecular underpinnings of this endodermal-myocardial relationship remain unclear. Researchers show an essential role for platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (Pdgfra) in directing cardiac fusion. Mutation of pdgfra disrupts heart tube assembly in both zebrafish and mouse. Timelapse analysis of individual cardiomyocyte trajectories reveals misdirected cells in zebrafish pdgfra mutants, suggesting that PDGF signaling steers cardiomyocytes toward the midline during cardiac fusion. The endodermal contraction may provide physical force that pulls the myocardium toward the midline, but it is not enough to account for the entire path traversed by the moving cardiomyocytes. Our work supports a model in which PDGF signaling underlies communication between the endoderm and myocardium and thereby directs the cell movements that initiate heart tube assembly.
Protein function is influenced by subcellular localization, and cells regulate protein localization to control biological processes. A proteomic method called Dynamic Organellar Maps has been developed to enable global mapping of protein translocation events. It generates a database of localization and copy number information for proteins from HeLa cells, providing an unprecedented view of HeLa cell anatomy at the protein level. The approach captures protein translocation events following EGF stimulation, demonstrating its dynamic capabilities. This method enables the proteome-wide analysis of physiological protein movements without requiring specific reagents, making it widely applicable in cell biology.
The document describes the mechanism of peptidyltransferase center (PTC) completion in the final maturation of pre-60S ribosomal particles in the cytoplasm, which is important for creating translation-competent large ribosomal subunits. The process involves the integration of the last ribosomal proteins and the release of the nuclear export adaptor Nmd3. The study uses single-particle cryo-EM and cross-linking mass spectrometry to delineate the sequential steps in the assembly of the functional site of the ribosome, including the recruitment of the final ribosomal proteins, the displacement of assembly factors, and the rearrangement of RNA and protein structures. The researchers also investigate how leukaemia-associated mutations disrupt this process, which is critical for preventing developmental disorders and cancer predisposition.
Genetic associations at the HLA class I loci are strongly associated with the risk and severity of autoimmune diseases, malignancies, and infections. HLA class I associations are often associated with CD8+ T cell responses, but given the diverse receptors which bind HLA class I molecules, alternative interpretations are possible. This study aims to develop an immunogenetic approach for identifying and quantifying the relative contribution of different receptor-ligand interactions to HLA class I disease associations. The study investigates the immune interactions underlying HLA class I disease associations in three viral infections: Human T cell Leukemia Virus type 1, Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1, Hepatitis C Virus, and the inflammatory condition Crohn's disease. The study identifies and quantifies the relative contribution of different receptor-ligand interactions to HLA class I disease associations, focusing on TCR-HLA:peptide, inhibitory KIR-HLA:peptide, activating KIR-HLA:peptide, LILRB1-HLA, and LILRB2-HLA. This approach allows for the identification of the biological mechanisms underlying HLA associations with disease outcomes.
The Arabidopsis mutant wrky33 is highly susceptible to Botrytis cinerea, a necrotrophic fungus causing serious crop losses worldwide. WRKY33 is a key positive regulator of the host defense against Botrytis cinerea, and acts as a transcription factor, modulating numerous host immune responses. The study found that WRKY33 has dual functionality and confirmed that WRKY33 possesses dual functionality acting either as a repressor or as an activator in a promoter-context dependent manner. The study provides the first genome-wide view of the gene regulatory network underlying plant immunity governed by a host specific TF.
The dynamics of the pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans (MU), responsible for the skin disease Buruli ulcer, is largely driven by seasonal climatic factors and physico-chemical conditions in stagnant and slow-flowing ecosystems. The pH level in the water is an important limiting factor. Abiotic factors may modify the effect of abundance and diversity of aquatic organisms on MU dynamics, and there may be two routes of MU transmission for aquatic hosts depending on local abiotic factors. Moreover, host-parasite interactions are complex and influenced by environmental factors, including seasonal variations in climate or abiotic conditions in water and soil, which makes it hard to identify main drivers of pathogens in multi-hosts. The study developed models to identify abiotic and biotic drivers that may promote or block MU transmission in aquatic communities in Cameroon.
Researchers have revealed that the brain signalling protein, serotonin, sends multiple signals telling the body whether something is a reward or a punishment over a range of timescales. Previously, researchers had concluded that serotonin was strictly involved in the avoidance of punishment. However, new research involving mice revealed that serotonergic neurons electrically tagged with light-sensitive protein, channelrhodopsin-2 and known to involve brain reward pathways that drive behaviour and emotions, induced both positive and negative behaviour. The researchers concluded that serotonin sends “multiplex” signals—including both reward and punishment information—to help us learn from positive and negative experiences.
CDK9 is a kinase subunit of positive transcription elongation factor b that enables RNA polymerase II’s transition from promoter-proximal pausing to productive elongation. A lack of highly-selective inhibitors has hampered progress in targeting CDK9 as a therapeutic target. Researchers have developed i-CDK9, a potent and selective CDK9 inhibitor that suppresses CDK9 phosphorylation of substrates with genome-wide Pol II pausing. Although most genes show a reduced expression, MYC and other primary response genes increase expression upon sustained i-CDK9 treatment. The researchers suggest a potential combinatorial treatment strategy between CDK9 and MYC/BRD4 that would efficiently induce growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer cells.
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) is a large protein assembly that acts as a gateway between the nucleus and cytoplasm, allowing selective transport of macromolecules between the two compartments. The NPC has been implicated in gene regulation, with some nucleoporins (Nups) displaying tissue-specific roles. In the Drosophila ovary, transposable element (TE) silencing is achieved via the PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway, which relies on specific piRNA precursor loci and subcellular structures called Yb-bodies. Two Nups of the inner channel, Nup54 and Nup58, were found to be essential for TE silencing exclusively from the flamenco locus, which produces piRNA precursors, and their depletion compromises Yb-body assembly. The study suggests that some Nups can acquire specialized roles in tissue-specific contexts, expanding the repertoire of processes in which Nups play a role.
Researchers have identified a small molecule that can inhibit the oligomerization of the SAS-6 centriolar protein, which is critical for the formation of centrioles and thereby eukaryotic flagella and cilia. The team showed that the protein crystalized as a 9-fold symmetric cartwheel and provided an X-ray structure of this assembly. They also identified the binding site of the small molecule inhibitor. The Trypanosomatids, which cause major human diseases and rely on flagella for their pathogenicity, were of particular interest in this research. The findings suggest that targeting SAS-6 oligomerization by inhibitors could be a strategy to disable flagellogenesis in these organisms.
The significance of transcription of genomes is being debated. The authors of the document undertook deep RNA sequencing of poly-adenylated transcripts in several mouse taxa for comparison. Transcriptional states between taxa were found to have high turnover, with no major transcript-free islands existing in evolutionary time, suggesting that the entire genome can be transcribed into poly-adenylated RNA, and that any part of the non-coding genome has the potential to become subject to evolutionary functionalization.
Research has been undertaken to understand how organisms make decisions based on multi-sensory input that varies over time. Drosophila larvae were studied to identify the computations made when responding to visual and olfactory stimuli. A Linear-Nonlinear-Poisson cascade model was identified to represent the larva's navigational decisions to initiate turns. The team found that odor and light were linearly combined upstream of the decision to turn, and the same rule was found to apply in all cases. The results suggest that photo-taxis and odor-taxis are mediated by a shared computational pathway. The research is aimed at decoding the computations underlying the Drosophila larva's response to visual and olfactory cues when presented either individually or in combination.
This study explores the mechanism for growth cessation in fruit fly larvae in response to a peak of the hormone ecdysone, which coincides with a nutrition-dependent checkpoint known as critical weight. The study finds that the insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling (IIS)/Target of Rapamycin (TOR) pathway in the prothoracic glands (PGs) regulates ecdysone biosynthesis and critical weight prior to critical weight, ensuring that growth only stops once larvae have achieved a target nutritional status. The study also reveals a direct interaction between Forkhead Box class O (FoxO), a negative regulator of IIS/TOR, and Ultraspiracle (Usp), part of the ecdysone receptor. The study concludes that environmental conditions control ecdysone biosynthesis partially via FoxO-Usp before critical weight. Understanding the regulation of ecdysone biosynthesis provides valuable insight into the development of organisms and their response to environmental cues.
A study of the myotendinous junction of Drosophila flight muscles has revealed new functions for integrin associated proteins (IAPs) not required for viability, and how their functions are balanced. The myofibril termini has four distinct layers, one of which is built by a mechanotransduction cascade. It requires a balance between positive and negative activities of vinculin, tensin, Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK), and RSU1 to regulate adhesion. Genetic interactions between these IAPs demonstrated positive regulation of adhesion by vinculin and tensin, whereas FAK inhibits elevation of integrin activity by tensin, and RSU1 keeps PINCH activity in check. The focus of the study was to understand why so many proteins are required for linking the extracellular matrix (ECM) to the actin cytoskeleton. The study focused on understanding the role of IAPs in the Indirect Flight Muscles (IFMs) of adult Drosophila. Loss of IAPs, specifically vinculin, FAK, tensin, and RSU1, led to defects in the morphology of myofibrils. The study suggests that the IAPs are necessary to build or strengthen the attachment so that it can withstand tension during pupal stages, and all four IAPs are required to balance positive and negative control to maintain an attachment.
Researchers from the University of Copenhagen have discovered that tumour cells that migrate into nearby healthy cells contribute to tumour progression. The discovery is significant as it appears that this process (entosis) is common in cancers such as pancreatic, breast, colon and cervical cancers. This is a key finding as their research shows that entosis leads to aneuploidy in human cancers, an abnormal number of chromosomes that cause genetic instability and can ultimately contribute to malignant tumours. This latest research builds on a 2007 discovery that showed cells could engulf other cells in the early stages of cancer growth. The scientists found that lysophosphatidic acid is critical in the growth and development of many tumours and, in particular, the growth of cells by entosis. 
The protein MAF1 regulates transcription by RNA polymerase III (Pol III), and represses it through association with a subunit of initiation factor TFIIIB. Additionally, MAF1 can repress Pol II-mediated transcription by binding to the TBP promoter or through interaction with Pol III-transcribed genes. Knockdown of MAF1 activates the transcription of the CDKN1A gene, which inhibits cell cycle progression, through recruitment of Pol III and common transcription factors. This activation occurs at the transcriptional level, as confirmed through nascent RNA transcription and analysis of R-loop foot-printing. The activation of CDKN1A is independent of p53 and occurs in different cell types. Simultaneous knockdown of Pol III and MAF1 abolishes CDKN1A activation. These findings reveal a novel mechanism by which MAF1 and Pol III regulate the activity of a protein-coding gene transcribed by Pol II.
Animal recognition within and across species is important for predator avoidance and social interactions. However, basic principles of information processing by the vomeronasal system are still unknown. The medial amygdala (MeA) plays a central role in the vomeronasal–sensorimotor transformation that leads to specific behavioral responses. The MeA is the primary recipient of accessory olfactory bulb (AOB) inputs and disruptions in MeA signaling can cause deficits in social and predator recognition. MeA sensory responses in mice have been characterized and show stimulus selectivity with a striking sexually dimorphic sensory representation. The development of sexually dimorphic circuits in the MeA requires steroid signaling near the time of puberty to organize the functional representation of sensory stimuli.
Kainate receptors (KARs) are a type of glutamate receptors that mediate synaptic transmission in the brain. Neto proteins have recently been identified as auxiliary subunits for KARs, but their role in the synaptic trafficking of KAR GluK1 remains poorly understood. The study found that GluK1 receptor surface expression is limited and does not target excitatory synapses, but Neto1 and Neto2 increase GluK1 surface expression and drive it to synapses. GluK1 is selectively incorporated into silent synapses and excluded from synapses expressing AMPA receptors. Neto2 slows GluK1 deactivation, while Neto1 speeds GluK1 desensitization. These findings establish critical roles for Neto auxiliary subunits in controlling KAR properties and synaptic incorporation.
The document discusses how the unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in mammalian cells. The UPR activation involves three signal transducers, IRE1, PERK, and ATF6, each directed by a unique transducer to defend protein-folding homeostasis in the ER. The document provides evidence suggesting that binding of the heat-shock protein (Hsp70) chaperone BiP to IRE1 represses UPR signaling in vivo. Moreover, the authors report that the IRE1 transducer is repressed by interacting with BiP that promotes its monomeric inactive state. The authors suggest that waning ER stress partitions ERdj4 and BiP to IRE1LD to initiate active repression of UPR signaling.
Targeting autophagy, a completely different process, can overcome multiple BRAF inhibitor resistance mechanisms in brain tumors, according to a report by a team from UT Southwestern Medical Center. Genetic and pharmacological autophagy inhibition overcame molecularly distinct resistance mechanisms to inhibit tumor cell growth and increase cell death in vemurafenib-resistant brain tumors, with favorable clinical responses when chloroquine was added to vemurafenib. The findings suggest autophagy inhibition could be a different way to circumvent BRAF inhibitor resistance in CNS tumors, without targeting the same or similar kinase pathways, or using parallel pathway.
The study investigates the mechanisms behind why the segmentation gene network in insects can produce equivalent phenotypic outputs despite differences in upstream regulatory inputs between species. It focuses on the gap gene network in the scuttle fly Megaselia abdita and looks at the initiation and dynamics of gap gene expression. While the qualitative structure of the gap gene network is conserved between species, there are differences in the strength of regulatory interactions, which researchers call quantitative system drift. Gap gene expression differs significantly between M. abdita and Drosophila melanogaster during early to mid blastoderm stage but converges to equivalent patterns before the onset of gastrulation. The study shows that such quantitative developmental system drift is not unique to the dipteran lineage and is likely to be a widespread mechanism for developmental evolution.
The study explores the evolution of C4 photosynthesis from a C3 model using constraint-based modelling (CBM). CBM models selective pressures through objective functions to predict optimal metabolic solutions under various conditions. It identifies resource limitation and high photorespiratory flux as selective pressures that led to the evolution of C4. The study also predicts that light availability and distribution guide the evolution of possible decarboxylation enzymes. The model provides a window into evolutionary processes and shows that CBM is a useful tool to study the evolution of novel metabolic pathways. The study establishes a generic two-celled CBM model, which assumes a photoautotrophic growth scenario with nitrate as the sole nitrogen source, and light, sulphates, and phosphate are freely available. The study demonstrates that evolution is predictable at the molecular level in eukaryotic systems and defines the selective pressures and limitations guiding the 'choice' of metabolic flux.
Stress can cause prolonged activation of the kappa opioid receptor (κOR), which is linked to the regulation of dopamine and non-dopamine cell function. Activation of κOR is mediated by exposure to a stressful event and subsequently, by the constant activation of the receptor independently of any external stimuli. This is a novel mechanism that has been found to play a significant role in the reoccurrence of drug-seeking behavior after cold-water swim stress. The study also found that the prolongation of κOR regulation after an acute stressor suppresses long-term potentiation of inhibitory synapses, which could help understand stress-induced drug seeking and provide new targets for treating substance use disorders. The study's authors also suggest that dynorphin/kappa opioid receptors (κOR) may act as major mediators of stress-induced changes in inhibitory Synapses in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), known as the brain's reward center, which can lead to the escalation of drug use. The study suggests that constitutive activity of κORs may play a crucial role in the lasting effects of stress-induced drug addiction.
The two-pore potassium-leak channel Kcnk5b regulates the allometric juvenile growth of adult zebrafish appendages by activating developmental genes involved in the growth of anatomical structures. Kcnk5b activity induces the activation of Shh and Lef1, which are components of important morphogen pathways, in a cell-autonomous manner. Kcnk5b also induces the expression of developmental genes in different mammalian cell lines, suggesting that one electrophysiological stimulus can regulate the allometric growth of diverse populations of cells in the fin. Post-translational modification of Kcnk5b by calcineurin regulates channel activity to scale the fin. Kcnk5b activity is sufficient to promote the transcription of specific developmental genes in several different tissue types to promote allometric growth of the finfold. The broad activation of the Lef1-dependent Wnt reporter in several tissues suggests that Kcnk5b acts via non-cell autonomous communication among cells.
Macrophages are a type of immune cell that contributes to cancer progression. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) is a protein that regulates physiological processes and inhibits tumour malignancy. Synthetic PPARγ agonists, such as the TZD diabetes drugs rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have been linked to anti-tumor effects. However, it is not clear how macrophages contribute to PPARγ anti-tumour functions. This study shows that mice with PPARγ deletion in macrophages experience more severe mammary tumour development and impaired anti-tumour effects of rosiglitazone. Gpr132, a macrophage pro-inflammatory and pro-tumour protein, has been identified as a direct PPARγ target in macrophages. Deleting Gpr132 not only retards inflammation and cancer growth, but also abolishes the anti-tumour effects of PPARγ and rosiglitazone. Therefore, macrophage PPARγ and Gpr132 are essential modulators of tumour-associated macrophages, new cancer therapeutic targets and critical mediators of TZD anti-cancer effects.
The dynamics and biophysical mechanisms of axon fasciculation, a process important in the development of neural networks, are poorly understood. Using mice olfactory epithelia as a model system, researchers observed that axons interacted with each other through their shafts, leading to zippering and unzippering behavior that regulated fasciculation. This study provides a detailed biophysical analysis of zippering, provides the first quantification of the force of axon-axon adhesion, and introduces a biophysical model of the zippering dynamics. The study highlights the regulation of axon fasciculation through the control of axon shaft zippering mediated by mechanical tension, a previously unknown role in neural development.
HIV-1 assembles at the plasma membrane of infected cells, a process that depends on the presence of PI (4,5) P2, a phospholipid. Researchers used a chemical biology tool to manipulate levels of PI (4,5) P2 in living cells and found that depletion of this lipid prevented assembly site formation, leading to the loss of pre-assembled Gag lattices from the membrane. However, subsequent restoration of PI (4,5) P2 re-established assembly site formation and induced production of infectious virions. These findings suggest that PI (4,5) P2 plays an important role in HIV-1 morphogenesis beyond Gag recruitment to the plasma membrane and indicates that Gag-lipid interactions are highly dynamic.
A gene called Rps27l, which works to regulate p53 activity (a tumor suppressor protein), has been found to act differently depending on genetic background. When the Rps27l gene is disrupted, it can activate p53, triggering apoptotic depletion of cells, and ultimately leading to postnatal death in mice. However, when mice have one functional copy of the Trp53 gene, disruptions to Rps27l can actually increase the incidence of lymphomas with p53 loss-of-heterozygosity and genome aneuploidy. The study provides a new paradigm of p53 regulation andreveals the dual functions of Rps27l in p53 regulation depending on the dosage of Trp53.
The study shows that male mice without the neuropeptide oxytocin have no preference for female mice. The study tests male mice's preference for the sex by using visual, auditory, and chemosensory interactions. The study also shows that OXT signaling in a sub-population of neurons in the medial amygdala is critical for tuning a male mouse's preference for male versus female social cues. The study further demonstrates that impaired chemosensory discrimination in OXT mutants correlates with processed chemosensory response profiles in the MeA, and acute modulation of OXT signaling in adults is sufficient to alter sensory representation in the MeA and sex discrimination in social interactions.
The document discusses the role of GRAMD1s, endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-anchored lipid transfer proteins, in monitoring and facilitating the transport of accessible plasma membrane (PM) cholesterol to the ER to maintain cellular homeostasis. The study shows that GRAMD1s sense a transient expansion of the accessible pool of PM cholesterol via their GRAM domains and facilitate its transport via their StART-like domains. Lack of GRAMD1s results in exaggerated accumulation of accessible PM cholesterol, indicating that they contribute to PM cholesterol homeostasis. The document also discusses the importance of non-vesicular cholesterol transport in eukaryotes and the role of LTPs in this process. GRAMD1s may form homo- and heteromeric complexes via their transmembrane domains and interact with each other via luminal amphipathic helices, which facilitate their transport function.
Long-term adult stem cells in hair follicles are believed to originate from embryonic progenitor cells that acquire long-term self-renewal ability and multipotency at the end of organogenesis; however, the process of how this was achieved has often remained unclear. Recent studies found that long-term hair follicle stem cells arise from embryonic progenitor cells in a niche location that is defined by attenuated Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Inhibition of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is key to the suppression of Sox9, which is required for stem cell formation. Hair follicles start to develop in the embryo, but the bulge structure only forms when hair follicles enter the first postnatal telogen. The activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in basal epithelial cells is necessary and sufficient to induce placode formation. The lineage-tracing experiments revealed that Shh-expressing progenitor cells can become hair follicle stem cells. Nfatc1- and Lgr5-expressing cells were found to first appear in the upper hair peg and middle portion of the hair peg respectively, eventually becoming adult hair follicle stem cells.
Researchers have discovered that hypothemycin, a fungal polyketide which inactivates a subset of human CDXG kinases, also kills Trypanosoma brucei (T. brucei), the parasite that causes African trypanosomiasis, also known as sleeping sickness. T. brucei kinases are potential therapeutic targets for neglected parasitic diseases, but the issue is how to prioritise these proteins and quantify their engagement by small molecule inhibitors. The study found that hypothemycin kills T. brucei in culture and in infected mice, and they identified TbCLK1 as a therapeutic target for African trypanosomiasis.
Researchers have used serial block-face scanning electron microscopy to investigate the internal 3D structures of the brown planthopper and have discovered several novel and fascinating internal structures. They found naturally occurring three four-way rings connecting adjacent spiracles to facilitate efficient gas exchange, and fungal endosymbionts in a single huge insect cell occupying 22% of the abdomen volume to enable the insect to live on plant sap. The cephalic skeleton and muscles were reconstructed in feeding nymphs to understand the muscle and stylet movement during phloem sap-sucking. The results revealed an unexpected contraction of the protractors of the stylets and suggested a novel feeding model for the phloem sap-sucking.
Research into how neurons become sensitive to the direction of visual motion has revealed two alternative mechanisms at work in different sub-regions of the receptive field: preferred direction enhancement and null direction suppression. Researchers found that both mechanisms contribute to the high degree of directional selectivity found in the fly’s primary motion-sensing neurons, T4 and T5. The study investigated the columnar organization of the optic lobes in flies and found that T4 neurons pool input from multiple columns, indicating that they integrate information spatially. The team validated their findings by testing T4 cells with sequence pulses, ultimately concluding that both preferred direction enhancement and null direction suppression contribute to the directionally selective responses of T4 cells.
A pathway required for C. elegans to detect proteasome dysfunction and activate the transcription factor SKN-1 has been identified. The ER-associated isoform of SKN-1 (SKN-1A) is essential for the response, and the genes required for SKN-1 activation encode regulators of ER traffic and an aspartic protease called DDI-1. Mammalian Nrf1, which is also ER-associated, undergoes proteolytic cleavage upon proteasome inhibition, suggesting a conserved mechanism of proteasome surveillance. Mutations affecting DDI-1, regulators of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway (ERAD), and a peptide N-glycanase, all of which target proteins for degradation by the proteasome, cause defects in the transcriptional response to proteasome dysfunction, indicating they are required for SKN-1 activation. This pathway is essential for maintaining proteasome function in animals and may provide a therapeutic target for combating diseases associated with prote
The SAVE trial investigated whether early treatment with anakinra can prevent severe respiratory failure (SRF) in COVID-19 patients with high levels of soluble urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR). Anakinra was given subcutaneously at 100mg once daily for 10 days. The study found that anakinra, compared to standard of care (SOC), decreased the incidence of SRF by 70% and 30-day mortality by 49%. Anakinra treatment also showed improvements in inflammatory mediators and increased ventilator-free days until day 28. The study was funded by various organizations and is still ongoing, but the interim analysis showed promising results in early suPAR-guided anakinra treatment to prevent SRF in COVID-19 patients.
The Frh complex is a key enzyme in the metabolism of methanogenic archaea as it allows for the reduction of carbon dioxide to methane. It contains a [NiFe]-hydrogenase (Frh) that facilitates the reversible reduction of the soluble hydride carrier, F420. Frh forms a huge complex of FrhABG heterotrimers which account for approximately 1% of the cytoplasmic protein in the organism. The structure of Frh has been determined by near-atomic resolution cryo-EM and the 1.2 MDa complex was found to consist of 12 copies of the heterotrimer. The complex forms a hollow spherical shell with strong electron density of the chains of metal clusters running parallel to the protein shell, and the F420-binding site is located at the end of the chain near the outside of the spherical structure. FrhA, the largest subunit, has considerable homology to known large subunit structures and contains a binuclear [NiFe]-center. The reduction of carbon dioxide to methane occurs through the oxidation of four molecules of H2 by Frh and other hydrogenases.
This document discusses a new high-resolution structure of a protein called CLC-ec1, which is important for chloride ion transport in cells, and describes a global conformational change that widens the extracellular entrance to the protein, improving accessibility for the Cl&minus; substrate. This change was not observed in previous crystal structures, and the data obtained from this new structure and various experiments reconciles existing data on all CLC-type proteins. CLC proteins are present in various parts of the body and are physiologically important, seen from phenotypes observed in knockout animals and links to human disease. The widening of the extracellular entrance in the CLC-ec1 protein predicts faster Cl&minus; transport through it compared to other related proteins.
Researchers have discovered that the RNA binding protein IMP1 is expressed by fetal neural stem cells, but not adult ones. The protein IMP1 is promoted by Wnt signalling and Lin28a expression, while being opposed by let-7 microRNAs. By establishing this, the article shows that a network of heterochronic gene products including Lin28a, let-7, IMP1, and HMGA2 contributes to regulating the temporal changes in stem cell properties. The neural stem cells in the CNS forebrain persist throughout life, but the rate of neurogenesis, the frequency of stem cells, and their rate of proliferation, all decline with age. These changes are largely regulated by a pathway that includes let-7 microRNAs, the chromatin-associated HMGA2 high mobility group protein, and the p16Ink4a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. The perinatal loss of IMP1 expression is part of the mechanism that allows Wnt signalling to only maintain declining numbers of stem cells during adulthood.
Scientists have discovered how the actomyosin cytoskeleton generates a fundamental mechanism of symmetry breaking (LR) in early embryonic development. Researchers have combined chiral fluid theory, which describes how properties of fluids that involve the helicity of atomic structures influence the behaviour of the fluids, with experiments on the C. elegans embryo to show that the actomyosin cortex, a thin actin gel containing myosin motors and actin binding proteins, generate an active chiral torque to facilitate chiral symmetry breaking which determines the fundamental orientation of the body, such as the placement of organs, and the left and right sides of the body. Active torques drive chiral counter-rotating cortical flow in the zygote which was also found to depend on myosin activity and can be altered through changes in Rho signalling. The study found that the cell uses active torques to break chiral symmetry.
Auxiliary factors interact with the key protein Rad51 to promote productive homologous recombination (HR), a major DNA double-strand break repair pathway. Swi5-Sfr1 is a conserved auxiliary factor that stimulates Rad51, and two sites within the intrinsically disordered N-terminus of Sfr1 were found to cooperatively bind Rad51. Although amino acid substitution mutants could promote DNA repair, deletion of this domain impaired Rad51 stimulation in vitro and rendered cells sensitive to DNA damage. The DNA repair observed in the mutants was dependent on Rad55-Rad57, another auxiliary factor complex previously thought to function independently of Swi5-Sfr1. The results imply that Swi5-Sfr1 and Rad55-Rad57 can collaboratively stimulate Rad51 in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
The protein Munc13-1 is essential for regulating neurotransmitter release in the brain. It mediates several steps in the release process, but it is not clear how its various domains function together. A crystal structure of a Munc13-1 fragment including its C1, C2B and MUN domains has revealed a 19.5 nm-long multi-helical structure, providing insights into how the various domains of Munc13-1 are coordinated. The structure has important implications for understanding neurotransmitter release and presynaptic plasticity.
Metformin, a drug used to treat diabetes, has been shown to inhibit cancer progression. However, the mechanism by which it does so is not fully understood. This study found that metformin inhibited mitochondrial complex I (NADH dehydrogenase) activity and cellular respiration in human cancer cells, leading to decreased cellular proliferation and increased cell death under glucose deprivation. The effects were reversed when a metformin-resistant gene was overexpressed. This suggests that metformin's inhibitory effects on cancer progression are cancer cell autonomous and depend on its ability to inhibit mitochondrial complex I. Phenformin, a similar drug, was also found to exert its biological effects through inhibition of mitochondrial complex I.
Neuropeptides are transported by dense-core vesicles (DCVs) and play a vital role in brain development and synaptic plasticity. The molecules driving DCV secretion in mammalian neurons are largely unknown. Calcium-activator protein for secretion (CAPS) proteins were studied to understand their role in neuronal DCV secretion at single vesicle resolution. Endogenous CAPS-1 co-localized with synaptic markers but was not enriched at every synapse. Deletion of CAPS-1 and CAPS-2 did not affect DCV biogenesis, loading, transport, or docking, but DCV secretion was reduced by 70% in CAPS-1/CAPS-2 double null mutant neurons and remaining fusion events required prolonged stimulation. CAPS deletion specifically reduced secretion of stationary DCVs. CAPS-1 promotes fusion competence of immobile (tethered) DCVs in presynaptic terminals and that CAPS-1 localization to DCVs is probably
During systemic inflammation, a previously unrecognized system of rapid migration of myeloid progenitors and committed macrophage-dendritic progenitors from bone marrow to regional lymphatic capillaries is activated, mediated by Ccl19/Ccr7 and Traf6/IκB-kinase/SNAP23 activation, and is responsible for the secretion of pre-stored Ccl19 by a subpopulation of CD205+/CD172a+ conventional dendritic cells type 2 and upregulation of BM myeloid progenitor Ccr7 signaling. Mobilization of myeloid progenitors from bone marrow to lymphatics during inflammation may be important in fighting bacterial infections. Inflammatory lymphadenitis results in significantly increased frequency of primitive hematopoietic cells in lymph nodes; the elevated frequency of side population cells in lymphadenitis tissues correlated with the lymph node histological diagnosis. LPS administration induced the expansion of BM Lin-/c-kit+/Sca-1+ and immunophenotypically identified long-term ( LT ) -HSC, short-term ( ST ) -HSC, and multipotential progenitors ( MPPs ) populations at later time points with no changes in the BM HSC content by ZT7, suggesting a differential effect of LPS signaling on the HSC population. The reduction in the BM content of progenitors was not homogenous throughout the hematopoietic progenitor populations, and functional in vivo assays demonstrated that the accumulation of progenitors in LN did not contain increased levels of repopulating cells.
This research investigates the effect of substrate stability inside the GroEL/ES chaperonin cage. Using a stable encapsulation method and a fusion protein model, the study found that protein stability in the chaperonin cage is reduced significantly compared to that in bulk solution. The results indicate that hydrophobic and/or electrostatic effects in the cavity are strongly destabilizing. The study sheds light on the mechanism of action of the chaperonin GroEL and provides a more comprehensive understanding of protein folding kinetics and thermodynamics inside the chaperonin cage.
The regulation of protein phosphorylation within the secretory pathway has not been well explored, despite the fact that numerous secreted proteins carry out important biological functions and can be phosphorylated. Recent discoveries have identified a family of secretory pathway kinases, including Fam20C, which phosphorylates numerous secreted proteins and is critical for proper biomineralization. Fam20A, a Fam20C paralog, is essential for enamel formation, but its biochemical function is unknown. This study shows that Fam20A potentiates Fam20C kinase activity and promotes the phosphorylation of enamel matrix proteins in vitro and in cells. Although Fam20A lacks a residue critical for catalysis, it forms a functional complex with Fam20C and enhances extracellular protein phosphorylation within the secretory pathway. These results shed light on the molecular mechanism by which Fam20C and Fam20A collaborate to control enamel formation and provide the first insight into the regulation of secretory pathway phosphorylation.
A study has shown that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling, an important regulator of sensory neuron development, is mediated by the gene Megf8, which is required for guiding the growth of developing trigeminal ganglion (TG) axons. The loss of Megf8 function leads to defects in axon guidance in the peripheral nervous system, as well as to defects in the development of the limb, heart, and left-right patterning, resembling those observed in Bmp4 loss-of-function mice. BMP4 augments the development of somatosensory neurons in the TG, and BMP4 signaling contributes to sensory neuron maturation and target innervation. Megf8 is required for proper growth and guidance of the TG ophthalmic nerve, eliminating the role of BMP. During development, BMPs serve as growth and guidance cues for developing PNS axons as they project axons over long distances to form connections with appropriate peripheral targets. Hence, the study presents novel regulators of PNS development that could have a significant impact in improving neural development-related diseases.
Many organisms can survive desiccation by entering an "anhydrobiotic state," in which they can persist without water. Two such organisms, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, both require elevated amounts of the disaccharide trehalose to survive desiccation. During non-proliferative stages, both species devote a substantial amount of their internal carbon reserve to trehalose biosynthesis, and divert available carbon sources to the production of sugars. Researchers have revealed a novel physiological role for the glyoxylate shunt (GS) in these organisms, and elucidated a conserved metabolic rewiring that confers desiccation tolerance. The GS serves as a prototypical anaplerotic pathway, leading to the accumulation of critical TCA cycle intermediates, particularly oxaloacetate, which can be consumed for gluconeogenesis.
The Maternal Embryonic Leucine Zipper Kinase (MELK) is thought to be an important gene target in several cancer types, including basal/triple-negative breast cancer, and has been the focus of several clinical trials testing the MELK inhibitor OTS167. However, research using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing has shown that mutating MELK has no effect on the fitness of basal breast cancer cell lines, or cell lines from six other cancer types, and MELK-knockout lines remain sensitive to OTS167, suggesting that the drug blocks cell division through an off-target mechanism. These findings challenge the rationale for current clinical trials targeting MELK, and highlight the importance of preclinical target validation, which can be performed through the use of CRISPR/Cas9.
The document presents experiments showing that a dense membrane-bound actin network can significantly affect the lipid phase separation in the eukaryotic cell membrane. A model is proposed to explain these findings which involves the membrane composition, curvature and pinning sites. The pinning sites structure the membrane into compartments, while the picket-fence network acts as a barrier to diffusion, accounting for confined diffusion of lipids and proteins. Pair-correlation function of ‘opposing’ pixels is used to calculate the lateral movement of lipids and the diffusion barrier imposed by the actin filament. The effect of different pinning sites on domain structure is also discussed.
Researchers have developed a new biosensor capable of measuring the cellular messenger cAMP with nanomolar sensitivity, enabling detailed analysis of cAMP dynamics in sperm flagellum and primary cilia. The biosensor, based on the CNBD protein from the bacterial MlotiK1 channel, is able to bind to cAMP with high affinity, and was used in transgenic mice to reveal that previous methods for determining total cAMP levels did not accurately reflect changes in free cAMP levels. The researchers were also able to investigate the regulation of cAMP dynamics in sperm, with insights gained into the Ca2+-dependent control of cAMP synthesis.
The traditional understanding of decision bias as an internal reference point that sensory evidence is compared to is challenged in this study. Instead, the study shows that decision bias is implemented by individuals shifting the rate of sensory evidence accumulation towards a decision bound. This shift is induced experimentally by changing stimulus-response reward contingencies, creating either a liberal or conservative bias. Participants viewed a stream of textures and were asked to detect a target presented in the center of the screen, and respond via button press. EEG recordings were taken, and drift diffusion modeling was applied to participants' choice behavior. The study found that willful control of cortical excitability applied to strategically bias perceptual decisions to maximize reward. The neural mechanism employs changes in pre-stimulus alpha suppression linked to the post-stimulus output of visual cortex, as reflected in gamma power modulation. Experimentally induced shift in bias is best captured by the drift bias parameter. The study fitted two different models and found that the drift bias model provides a better fit to the data than the starting point model.
Researchers are studying 2-methylhopane biomarkers found in sedimentary rocks to gain a better understanding of their evolutionary significance. Hopanoids are a less well studied, but chemically diverse class of lipids found in bacteria, and are thought to be sterol surrogates. The abundance of hopanoid molecular fossils in sedimentary rocks, ‘hopanes’, dates back over a billion years, and those aged over 1.6 billion years could potentially serve as biomarkers for interpreting events in the early history of life. The objective of the study was to examine how 2Me-hopanoids might affect membrane rigidity in a contemporary context, a necessary step in understanding their evolutionary importance. The team devised experiments based on our hypothesis that methylation at C-2 would change hopanoids' packing with other lipids and proteins and affect membrane biophysical properties such as rigidity.Tests showed that hopanoid methylation enhances membrane rigidity, which supports the interpretation that past intervals of heightened 2Me-hopane abundance record a history of stress. To understand the biological roles of hopanoids, especially for 2-methylhopanoids, researchers quantified hopanoids distribution in a bacterium membrane, and found that hopanoids can have separate impacts on membrane rigidity and that their subcellular distribution varies.
Researchers have discovered a novel arenavirus, reovirus, and nidovirus in Pacific salmon populations in the Northeast Pacific that are collapsing, potentially due to infectious disease. These previously unknown viruses are also present in farmed salmon, highlighting the threat they pose to aquaculture. The viruses were discovered through metatranscriptomic sequencing and surveillance of dead and moribund salmon, and population surveys of wild salmon. In situ hybridisation showed the arenavirus mainly in blood cells and salmon macrophages and leukocytes. The nidovirus and reovirus were mostly present in farmed Chinook salmon but were not detected in wild salmon populations; however, the arenavirus was geographically widespread in migratory juvenile Chinook and sockeye salmon in the marine environment. The distribution of these viruses in wild salmon populations varied, highlighting differences in epidemiological patterns of transmission and infection dynamics.
The role of the cellular microenvironment in enabling multicellular tissue genesis is not well understood. Ctenophora offers a unique opportunity to explore this as it is an early-branching extant animal phylum. The extracellular matrix (ECM) and its component, collagen IV, have been studied in Ctenophora and other non-bilateral animal phyla. Collagen IV and its variant, spongin, are considered to be the earliest components of the extracellular microenvironment and as part of basement membranes, they enabled the assembly of fundamental architectural units for multicellular tissue genesis. Collagen IV is an essential component of the cellular microenvironment and is required for tissue function and architecture. The origin and evolution of collagen IV remains unclear, but its study in Ctenophora may offer insight into the features of the cellular microenvironment that enabled the transition from single-cell to multicellular organisms. The non-bilateral animal phyla represent this transition, and basement membranes are dominant in metazoa. Ctenophora exhibits a simplified set of ECM proteins, but cells can still construct prototypical basement membranes despite lacking the full gamut of bilaterian ECM proteins. Porifera and Placozoa lack basement membranes, suggesting that it was either lost in these lineages or was present only at specific stages during their life cycle. COL4A1-COL4A6, the six distinct genes essential for early development, were found in Mnemiopsis. The gene has a head-to-head orientation, which is a distinguishing characteristic among collagen IV genes in bilateria.
Ubiquitylation by the E3-ligases Mindbomb1 (Mib1) and Neuralized (Neur) is required for activation of the Delta/Serrate/Lag2 (DSL) ligands Delta (Dl) and Serrate (Ser) to activate Notch signalling, but Dl can signal in two modes that are independent of ubiquitylation. These two non-ubiquitylation-dependent modes identified allow Dl to signal during neurogenesis and the specification of sensory organs and wings. The study found that ubiquitylation of Dl is required for its full function, but it can also signal in two ubiquitylation-independent modes, one dependent and one independent of Neur. Mib1 and Neur can ubiquitylate Dl and promote Dl signalling in an ubiquitylation-independent manner. Mib1 releases Dl from inhibitory interactions with Notch, while the ICD and its ubiquitylation contribute to the degree/strength of cis-inhibition of a ligand.
Children with a parent diagnosed with cancer have a higher risk of injury, particularly during the first year after the diagnosis, according to a study by Swedish researchers. The study analysed nationwide data to assess the link between parental cancer and the risk of hospitalisation for injury among children, taking account of sex of the child, age, income and other factors. It found that, compared to children without parental cancer, those whose parent had cancer had a significantly higher rate of hospital contact for injury in the year following diagnosis of cancer. The heightened risk decreased with time.

The transcription factor Nrf1 mediates the "bounce-back" response in mammalian cells in response to proteasome inhibition where the mRNA of proteasome subunits are upregulated. Nrf1 is initially translocated into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), but is rapidly retrotranslocated to the cytosolic side of the membrane in a manner that depends on p97. Retrotranslocated Nrf1 is normally degraded promptly by the proteasome, however, in cells with compromised proteasomes, retrotranslocated Nrf1 escapes degradation and is cleaved N-terminal to Leu-104, yielding a fragment that is no longer tethered to the ER membrane. Proteolytic processing of Nrf1 between Trp-103 and Leu-104 generates a p110 form that is responsible for activating proteasome gene expression upon proteasome inhibition. Depletion of p97 led to the accumulation of Nrf1, but not the p110 form, which is necessary for processing of Nrf1 and activation of proteasome gene expression.
A study of rhesus monkeys has found that attention increases firing rates and stimulus sensitivity while decreasing noise correlations within visual cortical networks. Using population recordings, the researchers explored the effects of top-down mediated increases in excitability and concluded that a single biophysical mechanism could underlie the diverse neural correlates of attention, with the mechanism primarily affecting inhibitory neurons. Therefore, the study provides a simple and biologically motivated model of attentional modulation in cortical networks, producing insights into the circuit mechanisms behind shared neural variability and its dependence on neural state.
The process of mitochondrial outer membrane fusion is crucial for organelle function and involves large GTPases called mitofusins. The exact steps that allow mitochondria to attach to one another and merge their outer membranes are not fully understood. It is known that defects in mitochondrial fusion and fission are associated with numerous diseases. Mitochondrial fusion and fission depend on large GTPases of the Dynamin-Related Protein (DRP) family. Recently, a study combining an in vitro mitochondrial fusion assay with electron cryo-tomography (cryo-ET) has visualized the junction between attached mitochondria isolated from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and observed complexes that mediate this attachment. The study has found that cycles of GTP hydrolysis induce progressive formation of a docking ring structure around extended areas of contact. Further GTP hydrolysis triggers local outer membrane fusion at the periphery of the contact region. Cryo-ET revealed two main populations of attached mitochondria, characterized by morphologically distinct contacts between outer membranes. The ring of densities (docked intermediates) and the regular repeat of globular protein densities (tethered intermediates) indicates that protein complexes may be responsible for promoting mitochondrial attachment. The regular repeat of globular protein densities (tethered intermediates) is affected by GTP hydrolysis.
The budding yeast centromere is characterized by the presence of Cse4, a specialized histone H3 variant, and has been used as a simplified biological system to study the biogenesis, maintenance, and dynamics of centromere-kinetochore interactions. However, there has been considerable debate surrounding the architecture of Cse4 nucleosomes due to conflicting findings in recent microscopy studies. This study monitored the fate of Cse4 molecules throughout the cell cycle using photoconvertible fluorescent proteins, and found that Cse4 is replaced with newly synthesized molecules early in S phase and then remains stably associated with centromeres throughout the rest of the cell cycle. The study also showed that internally tagged Cse4 is a better reporter of the biology of this histone variant and that C-terminally tagged Cse4 is functionally impaired, causing slow cell growth, cell lethality at elevated temperatures, and extra-centromeric nuclear accumulation. Overall, the study provides important insights into the composition and stability of the Cse4 nucleosome and highlights the importance of using appropriate tagging strategies to study histone variants.
A study in South Africa has suggested that HIV, though fueling the global tuberculosis (TB) epidemic, is not a direct driver for the emergence and transmission of drug-resistant TB, according to an article in eLife. The study further estimated that around 62 per cent of South African TB cases were co-infected with HIV in 2014, and around 78 per cent of drug-resistant TB patients also have HIV. The incidence of TB with drug-resistance also appears to be decreasing in South Africa, after peaking around the turn of the century, while the number of people getting treatment for HIV is increasing, although this improvement is threatened by weak viral control in long-term patients.

The article discusses the co-occurrence of disease traits often determined by shared genetics and molecular mechanisms. The authors present an analysis of a range of behavioral and physiological traits in mice together with gene-expression measurements to construct a potentially overlapping groups of traits and their underlying combination of genetic loci and molecular mechanisms. The methodology predicts that genetic variation in the Klf7 gene influences gene transcripts in bone marrow-derived myeloid cells, which in turn can affect 17 behavioral traits following morphine injection. The article also discusses the utility of studying hidden causative mechanisms that lead to relationships between complex traits and the advantages of identifying shared molecular mechanisms for improved disease classification and treatment. The authors propose a methodology called GEMOT for constructing a causative model of trait-trait connections that addresses the difficulty of identifying shared molecular mechanisms and distinguishing them from shared environmental influences. GEMOT is a scalable algorithm for the systematic construction of three-layer modules, each consisting of a group of traits, their shared causal driver transcripts, and a genetic variant.
Traditional models of synaptic plasticity propose that glutamate signaling is necessary for the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which are forms of synaptic plasticity that underpin learning and memory. However, new research shows that glutamate signaling is not essential for the induction of hippocampal presynaptic LTP. Instead, LTPpre induction occurs via a non-canonical mechanism of retrograde nitric oxide signaling triggered by Ca2+ influx from L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, not postsynaptic NMDA receptors. Glutamate release can also decrease the transmitter release probability (Pr), which can promote presynaptic LTD. Therefore, the net changes in Pr during Hebbian activity depend on two opposing factors: Hebbian activity increases Pr, and glutamate release decreases Pr. For LTPpre to occur, a presynaptic neuron must fire with its postsynaptic partner and fail to release glutamate. These findings reveal a novel set of rules and mechanisms governing presynaptic plasticity that are distinct from those associated with traditional postsynaptic models of plasticity.
The study analyzed the transcription induced by various rewarding and aversive experiences across multiple brain regions to explore whether inducible transcription relays information about the identity and affective attributes of the experience being encoded. The study shows the existence of robust transcriptional signatures uniquely representing distinct experiences, enabling near-perfect decoding of recent experiences. This study introduces the concept of a neural transcriptional code, which represents the encoding of experiences in the mouse brain. This code is comprised of distinct transcriptional signatures that correlate to attributes of the experiences that are being committed to long-term memory. The results suggest that induced transcriptional signatures, defined by the combinatorial expression of minimal subsets of IEGs across brain structures, can be derived from comprehensive gene expression programs induced following an experience. Moreover, these minimal subsets are sufficient to decode the recent salient experience of mice.
The Hippo pathway is a major regulator of organ size during development and homeostasis, but how it senses and responds to increased cell density is not yet clear. In this study, the zebrafish lateral line primordium (LLP) is used to understand how tissue growth is controlled during organ formation. The loss of the cell junction-associated protein Amotl2a leads to overproliferation and bigger LLPs, which affects the final pattern of sensory organs. The study implicates, for the first time, the Hippo pathway in size regulation in the LL system. They also found that Amotl2a function in the LLP is mediated by the Hippo pathway effector Yap1 and the Wnt/b-catenin effector Lef1. Amotl2a, possibly by forming a ternary complex with Yap1 and b-catenin, limits proliferation in the trailing part of the LLP, therefore limiting organ growth during development.
A study has used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to investigate the kni locus, which encodes transcription factors for the Drosophila wing vein. Deletions were made within the cis-regulatory module (CRM) required for kni expression in the L2 vein primordium, and the resulting phenotypic changes were analyzed. The study found unexpected features of L2-CRM function including evidence for a chromosome pairing-dependent process that promotes transcription. The study also demonstrated the use of active genetic elements called CopyCat elements to delete and replace the L2-CRM with homologous sequences from other divergent fly species. The findings provide a much higher resolution view of CRM function and offer new tools for studying gene regulatory networks.
The entorhinal cortex (EC), a vital neural pathway for learning and memory that connects the neocortex and hippocampus, can be divided into subregions that connect differently with perirhinal cortex (PRC) and parahippocampal cortex (PHC), as well as with the hippocampal subfields. This discovery was made using high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at a resolution of 0.8 mm at 7 Tesla, which had not been previously possible due to the limitations of signal-to-noise ratios and spatial resolution in previous studies. The results demonstrate that the EC can be divided into functional subdivisions that closely paralleled the known anatomical connectivity patterns of the rodent and nonhuman primate EC. Furthermore, the study reveals the functional topography of the human EC as a gateway between the neocortex and hippocampus and shows remarkable accordance with principles known from anatomical studies of rodents and nonhuman primates. These findings could help improve neurobiological theories of memory and navigation and our understanding of the clinical impact of localized EC damage in the early stages of neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease.
D-Aminoacyl-tRNA deacylase (DTD) plays a role in preventing the accumulation of mischarged Gly-tRNAAla species that arise from achiral glycine being charged on tRNAAla by alanyl-tRNA synthetase (AlaRS) instead of the appropriate amino acid. DTD's active site architecture can edit mischarged Gly-tRNAAla species four orders of magnitude more efficiently than any other cellular checkpoint. DTD's activity on non-cognate Gly-tRNAAla is conserved across all bacteria and eukaryotes, indicating its key role as a glycine deacylator. The study reveals a previously unknown function of DTD in decoding the universal mechanistic dilemma encountered by AlaRS and its physiological importance.
The article discusses the trafficking of specific adenylyl cyclase (AC) isoforms, namely AC1 and AC9, in response to ligand-induced activation of Gs-coupled G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). While AC1 remains in the plasma membrane, AC9 traffics to endosomes and mediates cAMP production in response to endogenous receptor activation in these compartments. The study provides insight into the isoform-specific localization and trafficking properties of ACs in the endocytic network and the role of heterotrimeric G proteins in regulating the subcellular distribution of a relevant effector.
Researchers have developed a computational framework and a database format called TissueMiner, which stores cellular connectivity and geometry information of deforming epithelial tissues, allowing for the quantification, interpretation, and visualization of the information derived from segmentation and tracking of cells in long-term time-lapse experiments. Tutorials guide users through the capabilities, which include analyzing cell dynamics, spatial patterns, and time evolution in a flexible way. The framework was applied to analyzing the cells and tissue dynamics in vein and inter-vein subregions of the Drosophila pupal wing, revealing an unexpected role for convergent extension in shaping wing veins.
The natural product ophiobolin A (OPA) has been identified as a promising candidate for anticancer therapy but its mechanism of action (MOA) in human cells is unknown. A loss-of-function genetic screen using insertional mutagenesis was conducted in human haploid KBM7 cells to discover the MOA of OPA. It was found that OPA reacts with the ethanolamine head group of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in human cells, forming pyrrole-containing covalent cytotoxic adducts, which lead to lipid bilayer destabilization. Decreasing the levels of cellular PE, largely through inactivation of PE synthesis via down-regulation of the Kennedy pathway, mitigated the cytotoxicity of OPA. This study demonstrates the power of unbiased genetic screens in human cells to identify the molecular targets involved in the MOA of bioactive molecules.
The ykkC riboswitch is a prime example of RNA evolvability, with its ability to acquire new functions through minimal mutations. The riboswitch has two classes that bind to phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) and guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), and a co-crystal structure of the PRPP aptamer and its ligand has been reported. The G96A point mutant, which prefers ppGpp over PRPP, has been structurally analyzed, with a dramatic 40,000-fold switch in specificity, achieved with minimal mutations. The ykkC RNA fold is also characterized by a rugged fitness landscape. The article discusses the ability of RNA to adapt and acquire new functionalities.
A study has identified a molecule that plays a crucial role in cortical formation and function in the brains of mice. The molecule, called microRNA-128, regulates the proliferation and differentiation of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the developing neocortex, the part of the brain involved in sensory perception and consciousness. When the molecule is overexpressed, NPC proliferation is reduced but neuronal differentiation is promoted, while when endogenous levels are reduced, the opposite effects are observed. The molecule works by repressing pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1), a critical protein for cell division, therefore influencing neurogenesis, the process by which integrated neurons are generated from NPCs. The findings suggest that miR-128 may be an important regulator of neurogenesis in the embryonic cortex and may account for abnormal cortical development in neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism, Treacher Collins syndrome and neural tube defects.
This study explores the genetic basis and evolution of social behavior in ants, specifically focusing on age-based division of labor between nurse and foraging ants in the species Monomorium pharaonis. The study identifies modules of co-expressed genes associated with this behavior and examines their evolutionary conservation and regulatory context. The results show that while highly connected and expressed genes are more evolutionarily conserved, forager-upregulated genes are more highly connected and conserved compared to nurse-upregulated genes, which are less connected and more labile. The study also compares previous research on the genetic basis of social behavior, highlighting differences between the "genetic toolkit hypothesis" that proposes a conserved set of genes and pathways underlying complex social behavior and the "novel social genes hypothesis" that emphasizes novel genes and rapid evolution of social traits. Overall, the study suggests that the genetic architecture of social behavior includes both highly conserved and labile components.
The ability of aging adult stem cells to regenerate their tissues following injury is impaired and is not fully understood. Researchers used aging Drosophila melanogaster germline stem cells (GSCs) to model stem cell injury and identified a regeneration defect in these cells after exposure to ionizing radiation. Mechanistically, the foxo and mTOR pathways were found to be important regulators of GSC quiescence and cell cycle reentry after exposure. The lack of regeneration in aging GSCs after radiation exposure was rescued by loss of foxo. The study suggests that misregulation of foxo may underlie the decline in regenerative capacity with age. The researchers also identified that GSCs enter a brief period of quiescence following low doses of ionizing radiation. The study may provide insight into the development of cancer therapeutics and improved aging remedies.
The presence of persistent reservoirs is the biggest challenge in finding a cure for HIV-1. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) has been successful in reducing the extent of these reservoirs, but they still persist and can cause viral rebound upon treatment discontinuation. One of the most successful strategies has been the early initiation of ART, which has been shown to reduce the total and integrated HIV-1 DNA levels compared to later treatment initiation. Early treatment is also associated with some immunovirological features of long-term non-progressors (LTNPs) that may be useful for developing a functional cure. However, low levels of viral reservoirs, facilitated by early treatment initiation, may not be sufficient for post-treatment virological control. The interplay between virological and immunological parameters is also critical in achieving this goal. Recent evidence indicates that sustained remission from viremia rebound seems a more realistic prospect in terms of HIV-1 cure research in the short term. Therefore, early treatment initiation with ART will likely become standard clinical practice in HIV care. The objective of this study was to assess the impact of temporal treatment initiation in the context of very prolonged ART treatment on the size of the proviral HIV-1 reservoir and compare results to those of LTNPs and acute seroconverters before ART initiation to assess the size of HIV-1 DNA using digital PCR. The study concluded that the total HIV-1 DNA remains detectable in all patients even in the setting of effective early and prolonged ART, although at lower levels than in patients with later ART initiation, but not reaching the levels found in LTNPs.
Researchers have used an ancient virus protein from 32 million years ago to discover how viruses become extinct. The scientists found that a single gene from the ancient virus, HERV-T, was uniquely preserved in human genomes and had "exapted" or evolved to block the ability of the virus to infect cells. This had apparently contributed to the virus's extinction. The gene also had the potential to regulate cellular metabolism. Endogenous proviruses can become inherited, and about 8% of the human genome is made up of inactive, fragmentary endogenous retroviruses. However, the researchers' work on this aspect has yet to determine what causes the disappearance of virus lineages.
Research has suggested that the formation of mHtt inclusion bodies in Huntington disease (HD) might be a protective response to limit proteotoxicity. However, the process by which inclusion bodies are formed and detoxified has been poorly understood. Recent research has shown that spatial sequestration of mHtt into inclusion bodies is policed by the RQC-Hsf1 regulatory system, which is more important than ubiquitination in mHtt detoxification. Additionally, mHtt103QP proteins have been shown to associate with the actin cytoskeleton, and the actin cytoskeleton appears to act as a screen for conditional ts mutations causing synthetic sickness/lethality with mHtt103QP. Strains carrying ts mutations in genes encoding actin itself, profiling involved in actin polymerization, cofilin regulating assembly/disassembly of actin filaments, Arp3 of the actin-nucleation center, Las17, an activator of Arp2/3 and actin assembly factors, and Mss4, a phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase involved in actin cytoskeleton organization, were drastically sensitized to mHtt103QP.
New research has shown that certain Cas9 enzymes can bind and cleave single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) by an RNA-guided mechanism, distinct from their well-known ability to target double-stranded DNA. The enzymes can do so without any requirement for a PAM sequence or PAMmer in the RNA target, and this activity can inhibit gene expression and protect against infection by ssRNA phage in bacterial cells. These results suggest the potential for use of Cas9 in programmable RNA targeting applications. The study compared the biochemical behavior of enzymes from the three major Cas9 subtypes and found that certain type II-A and II-C Cas9s can bind and cleave ssRNA sequences with no requirement for a PAM or PAMmer.
Researchers have published a study in which they use the most complete description of the mouse mesoscale connectome acquired to date to propose a generative network model. The model utilises two elemental organisational principles, proximal attachment and source growth, which the researchers show captures essential principles governing network organisation at the mesoscale level in the mouse brain and is consistent with biologically plausible developmental processes. The study supports the existing literature on the importance of spatial embedding and provides strong evidence that source growth is a major phenomenological rule that shapes connectivity patterns in the mouse brain.
Changes in blood flow and associated mechanical forces play an important role in the development of atherosclerosis, a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the US. Disturbed flow (DF) in arterial areas where atherosclerosis develops can activate endothelial cells (ECs), leading to vascular inflammation and ultimately atherosclerosis. This study discovered that DF induced a metabolic reprogramming in human aortic ECs, increasing glycolysis and reducing mitochondrial respiratory capacity. This reprogramming was mediated by hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) downstream of NAD(P)H oxidase-4-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS). Inhibition of glycolysis reduced inflammation and demonstrated a causal relationship between flow-induced metabolic changes and EC activation. These findings highlight a new role for flow-induced metabolic reprogramming and inflammation in ECs in the development of atherosclerosis.
Gamma delta T cells, previously thought to only respond to protein antigens, can also respond to small molecules and chemical modifications, according to new research. Cyanine 3 (Cy3), a synthetic fluorescent molecule, and 4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl (NP), a well-known hapten, are both recognised directly by certain gamma delta T cell receptors. When immunised with Cy3, gamma delta T cells also mount a rapid, specific IL-17 response. The study highlights greater roles for small molecules and chemicals in immunity and points to gamma delta T cells as being distinctive and essential adaptive immune cells.

Phagocytic immune cells kill pathogens using a range of antimicrobial agents, including reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. To study this process, researchers used roGFP2-based fluorescent redox probes to monitor the redox state of bacteria during the phagocytic process. They found that phagocytosis by neutrophil-like cells led to rapid oxidation of the probes, which was dependent on the presence of NADPH oxidase and myeloperoxidase. The oxidation was also found to be specific to bacteria that had been phagocytized. These findings suggest that phagocytosis is a rate-limiting step in the respiratory burst that ultimately leads to microbial death.
Misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) undergo quality control and are degraded by the proteasome through a pathway called ER-associated protein degradation (ERAD). This process involves the ubiquitin ligase Hrd1 forming a channel with three other membrane proteins, and autoubiquitination of Hrd1 activates the channel. However, the mechanism by which Hrd1 escapes degradation by the proteasome and returns to its inactive ground state remained unknown. In this study, the researchers identified Ubp1 as a deubiquitinating enzyme that counteracts the autoubiquitination of Hrd1, allowing it to avoid degradation and regulate its function. Hrd1 stability was achieved through H domain-dependent recruitment of the catalytic domain of Ubp1, and control experiments showed that other deubiquitinases did not have the same effect on Hrd1 stabilization. Together, these findings suggest that Hrd1 channel is regulated by cycles of autoubiquitination and deubiquitination, and that Ubp1 plays an important role in this process.
Researchers have discovered a possible mechanism by which the pluripotency factor Pou5f3 regulates the development of three germ layers in zebrafish embryos. The team used fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to analyse in real-time the formation of Pou5f3 complexes with other transcription factors. They observed that Pou5f3 complexes with Nanog to pattern mesendoderm differentiation at the blastula stage, activated the BMP pathway, induced mesendoderm ventralisation and restricted complexes in the ventrolateral mesendoderm using Sox32. The interaction balance between Pou5f3-Nanog modulated by Sox32 regulates mesendoderm specification along the dorsoventral axis. The scientists emphasised that it is crucial for the proper embryonic gastrulation that specific levels of the Oct4 DNA-bound active fraction, indicated by its concentration, are maintained.
Researchers have discovered that the size of a Drosophila wing is regulated by JNK signaling during development. JNK is active in a stripe along the center of the developing wings, and altering JNK signaling within this stripe changes the organ size. This finding provides a new mechanism for how the Hedgehog pathway could contribute to tumorigenesis and offers a new strategy for cancer therapies. The study also suggests a more generalizable role for JNK signaling in developmental organ size control. Despite much research, intrinsic size control mechanisms in biology remain unclear. The determined JNK signaling plays a key role in regulating growth within the biological organism.
The relationship between pain and osteoarthritis (OA) progression is largely unknown, but a new study shows that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) secreted by osteoblasts during aberrant subchondral bone remodeling induces pain and OA progression in mice. Inhibiting the production of PGE2 or the PGE2 receptor EP4 can ameliorate OA symptoms, and PGE2 sensitizes dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons by modifying the voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.8, which is a potential therapeutic target for OA and other skeletal degenerative diseases. Aberrant subchondral remodeling-induced NaV1.8 neuronal modification is an important player in OA, and drugs targeting abnormal subchondral bone remodeling can attenuate OA by rebalancing PGE2 production and NaV1.8 modification.
PRDM9 is a protein that determines the locations of meiotic recombination hotspots in mice and humans. To explore the factors that affect PRDM9's binding and its subsequent recombination outcomes, researchers mapped human PRDM9 binding sites in a transfected human cell line and measured PRDM9-induced histone modifications. They found that PRDM9 binds to many sites outside of recombination hotspots, many of which are promoters that have low recombination rates, and that it can activate expression of a small number of genes. Specific sequence motifs were identified that predict consistent, localized meiotic recombination suppression around a subset of PRDM9 binding sites. The study also revealed the varied DNA-binding modalities of PRDM9 and demonstrated that its zinc fingers mediate its multimerization.
The study looks at the biophysical mechanisms underlying resilience to tinnitus and investigates the difference between susceptibility and resilience to tinnitus. The study found that tinnitus is developed in mice that cannot compensate for reduction in KCNQ2/3 channel activity following exposure to noise. Mice that do not develop tinnitus show a re-emergence of KCNQ2/3 channel activity and a reduction in HCN channel activity. The study highlights KCNQ2/3 and HCN channels as potential targets for designing novel therapeutics that may promote resilience to tinnitus. The study looks at different auditory brainstem nuclei, their spontaneous firing rates in dorsal cochlear nucleus principal neurons and investigates the intrinsic mechanisms underlying resilience to tinnitus. The study concludes that neither differential noise-induced hearing threshold shifts nor differential auditory nerve damage can explain the behavioral differences between tinnitus and non-tinnitus mice.
This study aimed to assess the effectiveness of sequential antibiotics treatments in inhibiting bacterial adaptation and resistance, with a focus on both heterogeneous and homogeneous antibiotic sets. The study found that fast switching between only β-lactam antibiotics resulted in increased extinction of bacterial populations, favored by low rates of spontaneous resistance emergence and low levels of spontaneous cross-resistance among the antibiotics in sequence. Extinction was not explained by applying heterogeneous sets of antibiotics. The study also found that alternating between β-lactams fast and in a regular order significantly constrained the growth of bacterial populations in the early phase of adaptation, with slower switches showing less constraint. The study suggests that tailored sequential antibiotic treatments may help to guide the optimized use of available antibiotics in highly potent, evolution-informed treatment designs.
Researchers have shown that KDM1A (a histone H3K4 and K9 demethylase), which is inherited from the mother, plays a central role in the developmental stages following fertilisation in mice. KDM1A removes certain methyl groups from histones, which allows key genes to be activated and development to proceed. Without KDM1A, the mouse embryos exhibit developmental arrest at the two-cell stage and defects in gene expression, resulting in critical consequences for development beyond the two-cell stage. These findings are important for understanding the steps required for proper embryonic development, and could aid researchers in developing new treatments for infertility and other developmental disorders.
New research has shown that Parkinson's disease occurs due to mutations in the genes for PINK1 and parkin that are responsible for mitophagy or the selective autophagic degradation of damaged mitochondria in cultured cells. The study also demonstrated that mitophagy increases with aging in muscles and dopaminergic neurons, and parkin and PINK1 play a crucial role in age-dependent mitophagy in these areas. The research was conducted in vivo with the help of Drosophila as a model. The use of mt-Keima imaging and correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM) exhibited the occurrence of mitophagy in Drosophila flight muscle and dopaminergic neurons, even in the absence of exogenous mitochondrial toxins. Furthermore, PINK1 and parkin appeared to be specifically essential for mitophagy during aging.
The study investigates the role of gamma synchronization in movement scaling in Parkinson's disease. The study found that subthalamic gamma power peaked in the sensorimotor part of the subthalamic nucleus during movements of different velocities, and correlated positively with maximal velocity and negatively with symptom severity. The gamma burst rate highly correlated with averaged power, increased gradually with larger movements and correlated with symptom severity. In the dopamine-depleted state, gamma power and burst rate significantly decreased, particularly when peak velocity was slower than ON medication. The study proposes that insufficient recruitment of fast gamma bursts during movement may underlie bradykinesia, a cardinal symptom in Parkinson’s disease.
New research suggests that targeting the histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) enzyme may provide an effective treatment for chronic migraine pain. The study found that inhibiting HDAC6 restored the cytoarchitecture of neurons in headache-processing regions of the brain, which was disrupted in mouse models of chronic migraine pain. The HDAC6 inhibitor also reduced the occurrence of cortical spreading depression, an electro-physiological property linked to migraine aura. The findings indicate that changes in neuronal cytoarchitecture may contribute to chronic migraine pain, and HDAC6 inhibitors could be a promising avenue for future migraine therapies.
The article discusses the evolution of sex chromosomes from autosomes and the mechanisms used to compensate for changes in gene dose. The study shows that X chromosomes are permissive for dosage compensation and that the dosage compensation complex acts via a chromosome-wide mechanism to balance transcription between sexes. However, there is no analogous X-chromosome-wide mechanism to balance transcription between X and autosomes. The article also discusses how abnormalities in chromosome number can disrupt gene expression and affect organismal fitness. The article analyses the function and significance of gene regulatory strategies in the nematode C. elegans to determine how X-chromosome dosage compensation balances X expression between sexes and whether an X-chromosome-wide regulatory mechanism balances gene expression between X chromosomes and autosomes to facilitate X-chromosome evolution.
A study has identified how to create three-dimensional (3D) human lung organoids, an unprecedented in vitro model to study human lung development and disease. The researchers developed cellular structures, called lung organoids that were capable of simulating much of the language in the human lung, including smooth muscle cells and airway cells. Current biomedical research relies heavily on animal studies, and the creation of organoids has the potential to drastically reduce the use of animals.
The synthesis of mRNA in eukaryotes involves multiple enzymatic processes, including initiation, elongation, splicing, and cleavage. There is kinetic competition between these processes, but it has never been observed in vivo until now. Using single-molecule RNA imaging, the researchers found that multiple competing pathways exist for pre-mRNA splicing due to kinetic competition. Splicing of the intron occurs both before and after release of the transcript, with no strict quality control checkpoint. A single missense mutation in the essential splicing factor U2AF1 perturbed the kinetic balance, causing splicing to occur entirely post-release. The results show that the balance between RNA synthesis and processing is perturbed by oncogenic mutations. The research also developed a dual-color fluctuation correlation analysis approach for extracting kinetic information from time traces.
E. Coli DNA polymerase V (pol V) is a low fidelity TLS DNA polymerase that is responsible for mutagenesis in damaged genomes. Pol V is activated using RecA and ATP, with ATP being an essential ingredient for DNA synthesis. Pol V requires ATP or ATPγS to function, but not GTP, ADP or dTTP, and it does not incorporate ATP or ATPγS into DNA during synthesis. Pol V is activated using a spin-column to separate pol V from free RecA and ssDNA, and an ATPase assay shows that pol V is a DNA-dependent ATPase with an intrinsic ATP hydrolytic activity. The ATP requirements for pol V Mut function vary depending on the RecA variant used in the activation, and although ATP or ATPγS is necessary for DNA synthesis, it is not required for activation of the pol V Mut. Pol V Mut requires a bound ATP for DNA synthesis and ATP hydrolysis triggers dissociation from the DNA.
Honeybee queens may embark on additional mating flights to increase genetic diversity in worker offspring, but this can reduce the paternity shares of previously mated drones. New research has shown that seminal fluid, which keeps sperm alive and motile and regulates sperm capacitation, can manipulate a queen's vision within 24-48 hours of insemination. This can reduce queen promiscuity during subsequent mating flights, potentially reducing fitness gains but increasing the reproductive success of earlier inseminated drones. RNA-sequencing, electroretinography, and field trials were used to confirm these effects. These findings suggest a newly discovered form of sexual conflict mediated by sensory exploitation, with seminal fluid driving selection for manipulative seminal fluid and compensating behavioural defenses by queens.
Researchers have found evidence that side-specific humoral signaling could contribute to postural and reflex asymmetries seen after brain injury, in addition to the well-established involvement of motor pathways descending from the brain to spinal circuits. They demonstrated that a unilateral injury of the hindlimb sensorimotor cortex of rats with completely transected thoracic spinal cord produces hindlimb postural asymmetry with contralateral flexion and asymmetric hindlimb withdrawal reflexes, as well as asymmetry in gene expression patterns in the lumbar spinal cord. The injury-induced postural effects were abolished by hypophysectomy and were mimicked by transfusion of serum from animals with brain injury. Administration of the pituitary neurohormones β-endorphin or Arg-vasopressin-induced side-specific hindlimb responses in naive animals, while antagonists of the opioid and vasopressin receptors blocked hindlimb postural asymmetry in rats with brain injury.
Researchers have discovered how the nuclear pore complex, which mediates the transport of material across the nuclear envelope, significantly advances its assembly process. Prior to this work, the process through which the nuclear pore complex assembled into the double membrane boundary was ambiguous. The complex is a large, non-polymeric protein found in eukaryotic cells, uniquely embedded within a double membrane, and is composed of multiple copies of over 30 different proteins known as nucleoporins. The research involved capturing temporally staged assembly intermediates by correlating live cell imaging with high-resolution electron tomography and super-resolution microscopy. The findings were published in the scientific journal, eLife.
The document discusses the collective behavior of bacteria in forming swarms and biofilms on hydrated surfaces. The expansion of both highly motile bacterial swarms and sessile bacterial biofilms is described using a generalized two-phase thin-film model that covers bacterial growth, extracellular matrix swelling, fluid flow, and nutrient transport. The steady-state expansion of bacterial swarms is associated with nutrient-rich, capillarity-dominated regimes, while the transient solutions of bacterial biofilm expansion are nutrient-limited and extracellular polymer stress driven. The dynamics of colony growth require a mechanistic description that accounts for spatiotemporal inhomogeneities in biological activity, emergent forces, and flows that transport metabolic agents.
Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 ( Prmt5 ) plays a role in follicle development, as it is expressed at high levels in ovarian granulosa cells of growing follicles. Inactivation of Prmt5 in granulosa cells leads to aberrant follicle development and female infertility. In Prmt5-knockout mice, follicle development is arrested with disorganized granulosa cells, and expression of steroidogenesis-related genes is increased. PRMT5 regulates follicle development by facilitating Wt1 translation, and its expression induces Wt1 expression for granulosa cell maintenance, preventing premature luteinization. Internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) also facilitate this process. Dysfunction in this process leads to abnormalities and arrest of follicle growth or atresia, affecting female reproductive health and fertility.
The mechanisms regulating the production of immunoglobulin E (IgE) are poorly understood. Researchers found that the IgE+ B-cell receptor (BCR) constrained the differentiation of B cells into plasma cells (PCs) in the absence of cognate antigen. The IgE BCR had a weak, constitutive activity which caused a predisposition towards early PC differentiation, prolonged cell cycles, and reduced antigen uptake and presentation, leading to a lack of IgE+ cells in germinal centers (GCs). The study found that the IgE BCR promoted antigen-independent PC differentiation and plasma cells in the absence of cognate antigen.
CaImAn is an open-source library for the analysis of calcium imaging data in the brain. It offers automatic and scalable solutions for motion correction and neural activity identification, requiring minimal user intervention. CaImAn is suitable for both two-photon and one-photon imaging and enables real-time analysis of streaming data. CaImAn improves upon previous methods in terms of scalability and qualitative performance, and has been shown to achieve near-human performance in detecting locations of active neurons. The software is implemented primarily in Python and is compatible with a variety of computing infrastructures. CaImAn has been benchmarked against nine mouse two-photon datasets and outperformed other popular calcium imaging data analysis packages. The software provides a valuable tool for large-scale, automated, and reproducible analysis of brain data.
The regulation of microtubule dynamics during cell division is essential, and the kinesin-13 motor protein MCAK plays a critical role as a microtubule depolymerase. Recent studies have determined the structure of MCAK motor domain and revealed that its C-terminus binds to two motor domains in solution and is displaced allosterically upon microtubule binding, allowing accumulation at microtubule ends. MCAK undergoes conformational changes involving its C-terminus during the soluble to microtubule-bound transition, presenting a new paradigm for kinesin regulation by microtubules. Full-length MCAK is a physiological dimer and its inter- and intra-molecular interactions regulate MCAK activity. The MCAK C-terminus controls the affinity of full-length MCAK for microtubules and reduces its association with the lattice to ensure maximal recruitment to microtubule ends.
Researchers have developed a method to genetically encode organic cyanine dyes as non-canonical amino acids (Cy-ncAAs) into proteins, which could provide a solution to the drawbacks of existing techniques for incorporating fluorescent reporters into target proteins. The technique involves an improved method for nonsense suppression with in vitro misacylated orthogonal tRNA, which was found to be tolerated by the eukaryotic ribosome in both cell-free and whole-cell environments. The encoded Cy-ncAAs were shown to be functional and trafficked to the plasma membrane, and could be used in single-molecule studies. The method opens up new possibilities for studying protein dynamics in live cells.
A new study has found that moonlight plays an important role in the mass spawning of corals on the Great Barrier Reef. Mass spawning events occur yearly on the reef and are crucial for the success of coral reef ecosystems. The study analyzed the transcriptome of acropora millepora colonies over 8 days leading up to spawning, and found that changes in gene expression levels were linked to rhythmic processes and light signaling, including genes involved in circadian clock mechanisms. The study also looked at the effects of "light pollution" on spawning synchronization and found that artificial light disrupted the synchronization of spawning behavior in the coral colonies.
The function of serotonin (5-HT) and its effects on behavior remain controversial. To better understand its impact, researchers used optogenetic activation of 5-HT neurons in mice over different time scales. They found that activating dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) 5-HT neurons suppressed spontaneous locomotor behavior, but repetitive daily stimulation resulted in a persistent increase in locomotion over three weeks. The results suggest that 5-HT has short and long-term effects on motor behavior that arise from effects on motivational factors, with no effect on anxiety or spatial biases. The study used an optogenetic approach to target 5-HT neurons in the DRN for activation, providing genetic specificity and temporal control.
Researchers have found that cancer stem cells have different patterns of transcription factors and gene expression compared to healthy cells, due to large open-chromatin domain shifts, or super-enhancer landscapes, which reflect the tumor microenvironment. They found that a cancer-specific epigenetic network, enriched for binding motifs of a transcription factor cohort expressed in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) stem cells, is required for SCC chromatin landscape and is essential in malignant progression. They also discovered that hair follicle stem cells and SCC stem cells have distinct super-enhancer landscapes, indicating that the SE profile of tumor-initiating stem cells in vivo may be substantially different from that of normal tissue stem cells. They suggest that this knowledge could speed up the development of therapeutics and diagnostics to undermine oncogenic behavior.
The article discusses the evolution of multifunctional protein S100A9, which has both proinflammatory and antimicrobial functions, and how a single mutation can have pleiotropic effects on one functional state of a protein but not another. The article explains that S100A9 evolved to form proteolytically resistant, antimicrobial A8/A9 complexes in early mammals while losing its proteolytic resistance from a weakly proinflammatory, proteolytically resistant amniote ancestor. This work provides unprecedented mechanistic and evolutionary insight into S100A9 function and shows how a single mutation can have pleiotropic effects in one functional state of a protein while not impacting another to facilitate the evolution of multifunctionality. The study also reveals that proteolysis is not required for S100A9 activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4).
The Notch signaling pathway is involved in animal development and is triggered by the binding of a Delta/Serrate/Lag2 (DSL) ligand to a Notch receptor on a neighboring cell. The pathway is refined by Fringe proteins, which modify the interaction between receptors and ligands to control the specificity and directionality of signaling. The study focuses on cis-interactions between Notch1, Dll1, and Jag1 and their dependence on Fringe in mammalian cells, and how Fringe similarly modulates Notch-ligand interactions in Drosophila development. Co-expression of multiple ligands and receptors in vertebrates enable a large number of possible cis and trans interactions, making it difficult to determine which cells are communicating to which other cells through which receptors and ligands. The study analyzes Notch-ligand cis interactions and their dependence on Fringe proteins in cell culture and discovers a role for Fringe in modulating cis interactions in mammalian cells and Drosophila, which constrain the set of possible signaling states for cells expressing multiple Notch pathway components.
The document discusses gliosis, the primary response of the central nervous system (CNS) to trauma, and the proliferation and fate controls of injury-reactivated glia. The study focuses on the tectal radial glia (RG) in zebrafish optic tectum and shows that stab injury drove a subset of RG into the cell cycle, and the proliferative RG responding to sequential injuries of the same site were distinct but overlapping. The study reveals that the stochastic cell-cycle entry is dependent on Notch/Delta lateral inhibition, and the proliferative tectal RG undergo gliogenesis. Notch inhibition of reactive RG resulted in an increased production of neurons, which were short-lived. The study demonstrates that zebrafish tectal RG are largely dormant under normal physiological conditions and capable of proliferation after stab injury. The study also shows that stab injury can induce RG proliferation across distinct regions in the optic tectum except in the medial-dorsal region.
The brain can adapt to changes in sensory input resulting from sensory impairments. Studies have shown that adaptation to monaural deprivation can be achieved by reinterpreting altered spatial cues or relying more on the cues that remain intact. Appropriate behavioral training can enable monaurally-deprived adult humans to use both of these adaptive processes. This flexibility of neural systems may lead to novel therapeutic strategies for treating sensory disorders. The study also suggests that adult humans are equally capable of using both adaptive processes, provided they are given appropriate training.
A new study has conducted a comprehensive genome-wide analysis of Estrogen Receptor-alpha (ER), which drives 75% of breast cancers. The study found that there was a sustained increase in affinity, as well as a class of estra-2-diol independent binding sites. The study utilized the Parallel-Factor ChIP-seq method for precise quantification of binding, alongside normalization with CTCF binding sites. The results provide a detailed understanding in the context of the ER's role as both the driver and therapeutic target of breast cancer. The study also revealed the presence of two major trajectories of binding sites in the data, one dominated by low false discovery rate (FDR) and one by high FDR.
Researchers have identified the causes behind hybrid infertility of two recently diverged fission yeast species. Chromosomal rearrangements and related recombination defects were found to be major causes of hybrid infertility. Furthermore, at least three distinct meiotic drive alleles, one on each S. kambucha chromosome, contributed to hybrid infertility by causing nonrandom spore death. These findings support the idea that genetic conflicts, such as those caused by meiotic drive alleles, can drive speciation. The study provides insight into the mechanisms underlying infertility within and between species.
The "ecomultiplex" model is a framework for understanding and controlling the spread of multi-host parasites through interdependent transmission paths. In this model, multiple transmission paths among a diverse community of interacting hosts are represented as a spatially explicit multiplex network. The model was used to design and test potential control strategies for Trypanosoma cruzi, a protozoan parasite that causes Chagas disease in humans, in two empirical host communities in Brazil. The results showed that the ecomultiplex model is an efficient and low data-demanding method to identify which species enhances parasite spread and should thus be a target for control strategies. The interplay between predator-prey and host-parasite interactions leads to a phenomenon of parasite amplification, in which top predators facilitate T. cruzi spread. The model provides novel insights in understanding and controlling parasite spreading in real-world complex systems.
The document discusses the transmission of epigenetic information, specifically in regards to heterochromatin domains in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It tests the hypothesis that the size of a silenced domain determines the fidelity of inheritance and that histones carry memory of chromatin states through cell divisions. The results show that reducing nucleosome number at HMRa did not significantly impact the inheritance of a silenced state, in contrast to what was predicted. Additionally, the study tested the role of SIR1, a protein that facilitates recruitment of silencing machinery to silencers, and found that parental H3-H4 tetramer inheritance did not significantly contribute to transmission of the silenced state when silencer-based recruitment of Sir proteins was impaired by the sir1 deletion.
The article discusses how embryonic anterior-posterior patterning occurs in insects using both “short germ” embryogenesis and “long germ” embryogenesis. Drosophila is an example of “long germ” embryogenesis and is the most studied, while most insects use “short germ” embryogenesis. The study focuses on the wasp Nasonia to investigate the transition from “short form” to “long form” embryogenesis. Maternal and gap gene expression in Nasonia suggests that it uses “long germ” embryogenesis, with pair-rule genes even-skipped, odd-skipped, runt, and hairy all expressed in early blastoderm pair-rule stripes and late-forming posterior stripes. The study suggests that Nasonia uses a mixed mode of segmentation by patterning the embryo resembling both Drosophila at the anterior and ancestral Tribolium at the posterior. The expression and function of these pair-rule genes are analyzed in Nasonia embryogenesis. The article concludes with a summary of Nasonia eve mRNA expression, indicating that there are a total of 16 single-segment stripes of Nv eve.
Researchers have discovered that nearly all primary endocytic vesicles in mammalian cells arise from clathrin-coated pits. While other endocytic pathways have been proposed, such as the use of GPI-anchored proteins, this study found that these enter the cell predominantly via coated pits. The study used universal chemical labelling of plasma membrane proteins to define these endocytic vesicles, and found that clathrin-coated pits are responsible for at least 95% of the earliest detectable endocytic vesicles. This new data calls for a revision of models for the activity and diversity of endocytic pathways in mammalian cells.
The study suggests that the Vacuolar H+ ATPase (V-ATPase) and two V-ATPase assembly factors, TMEM199 and CCDC115, play a role in HIF1alpha regulation. Disrupting the V-ATPase genes increases the levels of HIF1alpha in aerobic conditions as it leads to intracellular iron depletion, impairing PHD activity and thus stabilizing HIF1alpha. Iron supplementation restores PHD catalytic activity following V-ATPase inhibition, indicating the links between the V-ATPase, iron metabolism, and HIFs. The study used an unbiased genome-wide genetic screen in near-haploid human cells to uncover processes related to HIF1alpha regulation. The study has shown that TMEM199 and CCDC115 are required for V-ATPase function, and form the mammalian orthologue of the yeast Vma12p-Vma22p V-ATPase assembly complex. The role of TMEM199 in V-ATPase function was unclear, but the study suggested that human TMEM199 mutations lead to glycosylation defects.
This document presents estimates of the extent of pre-symptomatic transmission of COVID-19 in Singapore and Tianjin, China, based on contact tracing data from early outbreaks. The authors estimated incubation periods and serial intervals to analyze transmission dynamics and found that pre-symptomatic transmission may occur in a significant proportion of cases. They emphasize the importance of public health measures for controlling the spread of the illness, even among individuals who appear healthy. The document provides detailed descriptions of the datasets and methods used for the analysis, which estimated the median incubation period and serial interval for both locations. The results suggest that the estimates of the incubation period with intermediates are similar, under the assumption that intermediates are relatively rare. The mean generation times are consistently shorter than the mean incubation periods, indicating that infection can occur prior to symptom onset.
Researchers have developed a mathematical model to study the replication mode of poliovirus in order to discover its life history strategy. The geometric replication mode (GR) was found to produce progeny virus that were approximately five generations removed from the initial, infecting genomes, creating the potential for the exploration of sequence space, as well as creating the potential for intracellular selection among related mutant genomes. The researchers used temporal, quantitative RT-PCR data of both positive-sense genomes and negative-sense strands to estimate the free parameters in their model. They found that by combining stochasticity and spatial structure, their model reflected and described the population dynamics and structure of the viral population during an infection cycle more accurately than previous models.
Skate cartilage, unlike mammalian cartilage, persists into adulthood and can spontaneously repair. Researchers identified a population of cycling Sox5/6/9+ perichondral progenitor cells that generate new cartilage during adult growth, which may be responsible for this ability. The study provides insight into the development, growth, and repair of cartilage in chondrichthyans and suggests they may be a promising model for cell-based therapies to treat skeletal pathologies such as osteoarthritis.
The organization of DNA into chromatin affects access to DNA information, and nucleosome turnover can provide information about which regions are involved in regulation. Time-ChIP, a new method for measuring nucleosome turnover, was used to quantify histone H3.3 turnover in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) during differentiation to neural stem cells (NSCs). Results showed that active enhancers had high turnover rates in ESCs, which increased even more at super-enhancers, while repressive Polycomb-Group regions had low turnover rates. Turnover rates correlated with DNA accessibility. Results demonstrate the usefulness of time-ChIP for characterizing known and potential regulatory regions. The method used SNAP-tagged histone H3.3 and quantified its turnover rates in an unbiased manner.
Research has shown that altering the frequency of codon pair (CP) usage in RNA virus genomes can create safer, attenuated virus vaccines. However, selection for disfavoured CPs unintentionally increases CpG and UpA dinucleotide frequencies which also attenuate replication. In order to determine which factor primarily influences virus replication, mutants of the picornavirus, echovirus 7, were designed and characterised. The study found that CpG and UpA dinucleotide frequencies primarily influenced virus replication ability and were independent of CP usage or translation efficiency. The study provides useful insights for the future rational design of live virus vaccines and their safety evaluations – attenuation is caused by enhanced innate immune responses to viruses with elevated CpG/UpA dinucleotide frequencies, rather than the viruses themselves being inherently defective.
The article describes how a non-canonical ATP-binding cassette transporter in E.coli, made up of MlaF and MlaE, auxiliary proteins MlaD and MlaB, ensures that the structure of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is asymmetrical by transporting out-of-place phospholipids from the outer membrane to the inner membrane. MlaD forms hexamers within the complex and binds strongly to phospholipids, while MlaB is necessary for the assembly and activity of the transporter by modulating MlaF structure and stability. The study provides novel mechanistic insights into how the MlaFEDB complex functions to maintain lipid asymmetry in the outer membrane.
Ketamine has been shown to have rapid anti-depressant effects in treatment-resistant depressed patients, but the cellular mechanisms behind this have been unclear. This study shows that cortical GluN2B-containing NMDARs are uniquely activated by ambient glutamate to regulate levels of excitatory synaptic transmission, and that deleting GluN2B mimics and occludes the actions of ketamine on depression-like behavior and excitatory synaptic transmission. These findings suggest a novel mechanistic model for the anti-depressant actions of ketamine, where GluN2B helps set basal levels of despair through regulation of protein synthesis and excitatory synaptic drive in the prefrontal cortex.
Research has uncovered a possible link between telomere lengthening and DNA repair protein Ku. The Ku protein heterodimer is formed from the proteins Ku70 and Ku80, and is well known for its role in repairing damaged DNA. Scientists from the University of Colorado, Boulder have revealed that Ku may also have a role in extending telomeres by binding to telomerase RNA, and that the protein Sir4 binds with Ku to promote telomere lengthening and telomerase recruitment. This suggests that Ku recruits telomerase through its interaction with Sir4, and that the negative regulators of telomerase, Rif1 and Rif2, compete with Sir3 and Sir4 for binding to Rap1, and thus inhibit Ku-mediated telomere lengthening.
FRMD8 has been identified as a new component of the iRhom2/ADAM17 sheddase complex, which regulates the release of multiple cytokine and growth factor signals. FRMD8 binds to the cytoplasmic N-terminus of iRhoms and is necessary to stabilize iRhoms and ADAM17 at the cell surface. In the absence of FRMD8, iRhom2 and ADAM17 are degraded via the endolysosomal pathway, resulting in the reduction of ADAM17-mediated signaling. The study demonstrates the pathophysiological significance of FRMD8 in iPSC-derived human macrophages and mouse tissues. The data suggests that FRMD8 is an essential component of the inflammatory signaling machinery, making it a new target for manipulating inflammatory signaling.
The Helicobacter pylori bacterium has a type IV secretion system (T4SS) that allows it to inject bacterial toxins into host cells, contributing to gastric cancer development in humans. Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to determine the structure of the H. pylori T4SS, dividing it into three key regions: the outer membrane core complex (OMCC), periplasmic ring complex (PRC), and central stalk. The OMCC consists of an expanded mushroom-shaped structure with an unexpected symmetry mismatch with the PRC, while the PRC is a short hollow tube connecting the OMCC and stalk regions. This study highlights the structural diversity of bacterial T4SSs and suggests that the observed structural differences could have significant functional consequences in secreting various effectors.
During meiosis, the removal and subsequent reassembly of the outer kinetochore, which mediates chromosome segregation, is coordinated with the meiotic gene expression program. In budding yeast, kinetochore inactivation occurs by reducing the abundance of a limiting subunit, Ndc80, through transcriptional and translational regulation. The researchers discovered an alternate NDC80 mRNA isoform, activated by the meiotic initiator transcription factor Ime1, which represses the canonical NDC80 mRNA expression, inhibiting Ndc80 protein synthesis. This mechanism allows for the temporal regulation of Ndc80, and thus the kinetochore, during meiotic differentiation. Two distinct NDC80 transcript isoforms are present in meiosis, with the longer isoform unable to produce Ndc80 protein due to regulatory upstream ORFs, leading to its inhibition.
Researchers have identified two subsets of microglia within the central nervous system (CNS) of both mice and non-human primates using autofluorescence (AF) as a discriminating parameter. The subsets, autofluorescence-positive (AF+) and negative (AF-), were found to differ in their ultrastructural features, homeostatic dynamics, proteomic content, and physiological properties, with the AF+ microglia subset showing an increase in size and complexity of lysosomal storage bodies with age. The AF signal in the AF+ subset increased in a linear and specific manner with age, leading to impaired microglia physiology and cell death, suggestive of a mechanistic convergence between aging and lysosomal storage disorders. The study also found that post-depletion repopulation kinetics revealed AF− cells as likely precursors of AF+ microglia.
The mammalian order Eulipotyphla includes moles, shrews, hedgehogs, and solenodons, and has a diverse range of semi-aquatic, semi-fossorial, and fossorial forms that arose from terrestrial ancestors. However, understanding the evolutionary pathways that led to these lifestyles has been difficult due to fragmentary fossils, unresolved phylogenetic relationships, and potential morphological convergence. This study uses the net surface charge of the myoglobin protein to address this question and generates a comprehensive molecular phylogeny of 71 species that resolves previously intractable relationships and reconstructs the evolution of myoglobin to identify ancient lifestyle transitions based on protein sequence alone. The study confidently resolves fossorial habits having evolved twice in talpid moles and reveals five independent secondary aquatic transitions in the order, including the remarkable ability of water shrews to dive, despite having the lowest oxygen stores and the highest oxygen requirements of all mammalian breath-hold divers. Myoglobin net surface charge is shown to be elevated within members of all living genera of semi-aquatic Eulipotyphla, suggesting a significant correlation between this lifestyle and ZMb. The study provides insight into the phylogenomic foundations of biochemical and physiological specializations that have enabled organisms to proliferate into new adaptive zones.
Metage2Metabo (M2M) is a software system that automates the reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic networks (GSMNs) and characterization of metabolic complementarity for large microbiota communities. M2M identifies key species and minimal communities that fulfill metabolic objectives and estimates the complementarity between metabolisms of species, allowing the prediction of metabolic cooperation within communities. The software system uses the network expansion algorithm to calculate the scope of one or several metabolic networks in given nutritional conditions. M2M can process hundreds or thousands of genomes from metagenomic experiments and is robust against data incompleteness.
Newly discovered fossils from the Rising Star cave system in South Africa, including Homo naledi remains, have implications for our understanding of human evolution in Africa in the Middle and Late Pleistocene epochs. These discoveries confirm the existence of a diversity of hominin lineages in subequatorial Africa, including H. naledi, which represents a survivor from the earliest stages of diversification within Homo. H. naledi may have been responsible for the production of Acheulean or Middle Stone Age tool industries. The hominin fossil record from this period is extremely sparse, and the newly discovered fossils, including those from the Dinaledi Chamber, cast the fossil and archaeological records into a new light. The fossils date back between 236,000 and 335,000 years ago, placing H. naledi in the later Middle Pleistocene.
Researchers have identified a protein called CCDC137 that is targeted for depletion by the HIV-1 Vpr accessory protein, which enhances HIV-1 gene expression and induces cell cycle arrest. The depletion of CCDC137 causes G2/M cell-cycle arrest, while Vpr-resistant CCDC137 mutants confer resistance to Vpr-induced G2/M arrest. The researchers used a proximity-dependent method to identify CCDC137 as a Vpr target protein, and found that it promotes cell-cycle arrest and HIV-1 gene expression through depletion by Vpr. CCDC137 is a member of the chromosome periphery protein group that localizes within the nucleus, primarily the nucleolus. Depletion of CCDC137 is known to cause G2/M cell cycle arrest and activate the DNA damage response, indicating that Vpr-induced cell-cycle arrest is due to depletion of CCDC137.
Researchers have discovered how Drosophila Transient Receptor Potential Ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) detects and avoids free radicals induced by sun exposure. TRPA1 quickly responds to even lower intensities of natural sunlight through its sensitivity to nucleophiles. The receptor mediates the quick and light-dependent feeding deterrence in fruit flies, and such isoform dependence also emerges in the detection of structurally varied nucleophilic compounds and nucleophilicity-accompanying hydrogen peroxide. TRPA1 (A) is the only conserved reactive chemical receptor in the bilateria between humans and flies. The insect TRPA1 can detect electro- and nucleophilic reactivity. Birds and insects can visualize upper-UV wavelengths (above 320 nm) via UV-specific rhodopsins. The chemical reactivity of free radicals generated by low-wavelength light causes DNA, tissue damage, and accelerates aging. The high UV intensity requirement for mammalian TRPA1 activation indicates that electrophilic sensitivity is inadequate for sensitive detection of photochemically-generated radicals. Insects have various sensory systems that enable them to detect radiation or specific ranges of light wavelengths. TRPA1 (A) is a nucleophile receptor that enables TRPA1 to detect light-evoked free radicals and mediate light-dependent feeding deterrence.
A study suggests that white adipose tissue found in the body can be converted to burn fat, which can then prevent and reverse insulin resistance in obesity. Visceral white adipose tissue (WAT), which confers significant risk for developing metabolic disease in obesity, differs from subcutaneous WAT in that it is resistant to adopting a protective thermogenic phenotype, which is where Ucp1+ beige/BRITE adipocytes accumulate. In a series of experiments with mice, researchers discovered that selective genetic ablation of Zfp423, a transcriptional suppressor of the adipocyte thermogenic program, resulted in the accumulation of beige-like thermogenic adipocytes within multiple visceral (internal) adipose depots.
The assembly process of segmented RNA viruses, such as influenza viruses and rotaviruses, involves a non-random selection of distinct RNAs that undergo complex RNA-RNA and protein-RNA interactions. A team of researchers has presented experimental evidence of sequence-specific interactions between rotavirus RNAs, showing that the binding of the virus-encoded non-structural protein NSP2 to viral ssRNAs causes RNA to remodel and stabilises inter-segment contacts. The researchers have identified these interactions and mapped the sequences involved in inter-segment base-pairing. The methodology provides insights into the stability of macromolecular complexes and can be universally applied for investigating assembly of other segmented RNA viruses and ribonucleoproteins. 
The evolution of transporter substrate specificities in relation to the emergence of biosynthetic pathways is not well understood. To investigate this issue, the authors used the Brassicales-specific glucosinolate defense compounds as a model system, with a biosynthetic pathway that diversified from the ancestral cyanogenic glucoside pathway found in more than 2500 plant species. Through their study, the authors confirm that glucosinolate transport capacity happened prior to the emergence of glucosinolate biosynthesis, in dual-specificity transporters of cyanogenic glucosides and glucosinolates. They also show that the first glucosinolate transporters had broad specificity and later subfunctionalized towards specific classes of glucosinolates. The authors’ findings propose two models for how substrate specificity evolved for the glucosinolate transporters, either glucosinolate transport first arose with narrow specificity for indole glucosinolates followed by a broadening of the substrate specificity, or the reverse.
The article discusses how microbes such as yeast and bacteria can adopt specific phenotypes in response to environmental stimuli and retain those phenotypes even after the stimuli has been removed. This is important for survival during adverse environmental changes. However, it is not known how environmental perturbations might disrupt a cell's ability to stably adopt a specific phenotype. The article uses a synthetic genetic switch in budding yeast to observe cellular memory and characterizes the resilience of the phenotypic state against perturbations in the extracellular environment. The article finds that environmental perturbations close to a critical transition can cause cells to switch phenotypic states, highlighting how phenotypic memory can become destabilized by environmental variability. The study suggests that phenotypic states become increasingly sensitive to perturbations near a critical transition.
A study was conducted to understand how bacteria affect plant health and to develop sustainable crop production systems. The study found that Rhodococcus, a genus of Gram-positive bacteria, can exist as either beneficial symbionts or phytopathogens depending on the acquisition of a virulence plasmid. The study also revealed the impact of horizontal gene transfer in rapidly generating new pathogenic lineages and providing an alternative explanation for pathogen transmission patterns. The study challenges previous conclusions that Rhodococcus isolates lacking virulence genes are causative agents of pistachio bushy top syndrome and suggests that the syndrome was likely misdiagnosed. The study used a genomic epidemiological approach to study the transmission patterns of Rhodococcus in a plant agricultural system and identified potential transmission patterns in nurseries. The study categorized virulence plasmids into INDEL variants and showed that the patterns of plasmids were inconsistent with those expected of transmission between isolates of a chromosomal genotype.
The study aimed to understand how spontaneous fluctuations in neural activity affect sensory processing in humans. The researchers recorded electroencephalography during stimulation with identical visual stimuli and analyzed how low-frequency oscillations modulated different stages of sensory processing reflected by distinct components of the event-related potential. They found that strong prestimulus alpha- and beta-band power resulted in a suppression of early ERP components and amplification of late components. The mechanisms underlying these effects were found to be functional inhibition, which underlies the reduction of early ERP responses, and modulation of non-zero-mean oscillations, which accounts for the amplification of late responses. These findings resolve apparent inconsistencies in previous literature and specify two distinct mechanisms by which prestimulus neural oscillations modulate visual ERP components. The results suggest that spontaneous fluctuations in neural activity impact the processing of incoming sensory information, and may explain trial-by-trial variability in perceptual and cognitive performance.
A study using data from 19 sub-Saharan African countries between 2000-2015 shows that a decline in malaria prevalence can lead to a reduction in the proportion of babies born with low birth weights. The decline was estimated to reduce the rate of low birth weight by 1.48 percentage points, or a 17% reduction in the low birth weight rate compared to the average in the study population. The study suggests that declining malaria burden can potentially reduce the low birth weight rate in sub-Saharan Africa, particularly among firstborns. The statistical methodology of a difference-in-differences study using a pair-of-pairs approach could be useful in many settings where different units are observed at different times. The study was supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences.
The MukBEF complex in Escherichia coli is involved in chromosome segregation and shares the architecture of other SMC complexes, with MukF serving as the kleisin. Unlike other kleisins, MukF forms dimers through its N-terminal domain, and a 4-helix bundle adjacent to the MukF dimerization domain interacts with the MukB coiled-coiled 'neck' adjacent to the ATPase head, leading to the formation of an asymmetric tripartite complex. The MukF N- and C-terminal domains stimulate MukB ATPase independently and additively, and impairment of the interaction between MukF and MukB leads to ATP hydrolysis-dependent release of MukBEF complexes from chromosomes. The interaction between MukF and the MukB neck is important for MukBEF function in vivo and is established and broken during cycles of ATP binding and hydrolysis. The N-and C-terminal domains of MukF each activate approximately 50% of maximal MukB ATPase, and they activate additively and independently.
The article discusses the mechanisms of planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling, which controls the polarization of cells in the plane of an epithelium. The study finds that the PCP core module is oriented by directional information provided by the Ft/Ds/Fj module through an MT organizing function. The study also confirms that the apical microtubule cytoskeleton shows strong spatial and temporal correlation with core protein asymmetry throughout wing development. The FT/Ds/Fj module transduces tissue-level directional cues encoded by Ds and Fj expression gradients to orient the core PCP module. The study also suggests that apical MT alignment provides directional bias for core protein polarization. TEM micrographs reveal the previously observed associations of planar MTs with apical intercellular junctions form juxtaposed, intercellular structures with MT anchoring sites on adjacent membranes of neighboring cells. Lastly, the organization of the apical MT cytoskeleton is traced from a single micrograph showing MTs spanning the cell preferentially in the P-D orientation.
Axon injury triggers EFA-6-dependent inhibition of axonal microtubule dynamics, inhibiting axon regeneration. The N-terminal domain of EFA-6 binds to MT-associated proteins TAC-1/Transforming-Acidic-Coiled-Coil and Z
The response of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) to mixtures of odorants is strongly non-additive and exhibits antagonistic interactions among odorants. In a new study, researchers model the processing of these mixtures by mammalian ORNs, focusing on the role of inhibitory mechanisms. The researchers show how antagonism leads to an effective ‘normalization’ of the ensemble ORN response, allowing for better odor discrimination and identification tasks. The study also explains several psychophysical experiments in humans and makes an explicit connection between a variety of psychophysical observations related to the perception of odorant mixtures and inhibitory effects at the single ORN level, providing a potential neurobiological basis to perceptual phenomena.
Macrophages are immune cells that play a critical role in the defense against bacterial infections. In mammals, these cells undergo a metabolic change, known as aerobic glycolysis (AG), in response to infection, which is associated with increased glucose consumption and lactate production. The authors investigated whether this metabolic change also occurs in insect macrophages using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The study found that Drosophila macrophages undergo a similar metabolic remodeling towards AG during bacterial infection, and that this response is dependent on the orthologs of Hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) and Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). The activation and maintenance of AG within these macrophages require elevated Ldh activity and induce changes in systemic carbohydrate metabolism. These findings demonstrate the conservation of the metabolic response to bacterial infection between insects and mammals.
A modeling study has proposed a vaccination strategy for Italy to reduce the number of people susceptible to measles that involves offering vaccination to the parents of children receiving the measles vaccine. The study shows that current vaccination efforts would not be enough to stop measles transmission before 2045 due to the frequency of susceptible individuals between 17 and 44 years of age. The strategy of parental vaccination could reduce the number of susceptible adults by 17-35%, increasing the chance of measles elimination before 2045 to 78.9-96.5%. The study suggests that if only 50% of unvaccinated children are vaccinated at school entry, elimination may not occur until after 2045.
Platinum-based chemotherapy is an important treatment modality for lung adenocarcinoma patients. However, resistance to platinum chemotherapy has remained a major challenge for over four decades, and identifying viable strategies to overcome resistance has been difficult due to in vitro assays of drug response being poorly tailored. Researchers used a pulse model to closely mimic the in vivo pharmacokinetics of platinum therapy, profiling cisplatin-induced signals, DNA-damage, and apoptotic responses across a panel of human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines. They proposed a therapeutic strategy targeting P70S6K using the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor dactolisib, which has the potential to improve outcomes for lung adenocarcinoma patients. A principal component analysis identified effectors of platinum resistance, which require further validation before any causative conclusions may be drawn.
Calcium is an important factor in synaptic plasticity and the relationship between calcium and spatiotemporal patterns of synaptic inputs is investigated. A computational model was developed based on data from rodents to investigate how excitatory and inhibitory inputs affect spine calcium. The study demonstrated that coordinated excitatory inputs evoked enhanced calcium elevation specific to stimulated spines, and inhibition enhances the difference in calcium between stimulated and non-stimulated spines, suggesting that spine calcium dynamics encode synaptic input patterns. The study also investigated the effect of spatiotemporal input patterns on calcium dynamics and showed that inhibited processes enhance spatial and synapse-specificity of spine calcium transients, which is vital in the regulation of neurotransmission. The findings suggest that calcium dynamics encode synaptic input patterns and may serve as a signal for both stimulus-specific potentiation and heterosynaptic depression, maintaining balanced activity in a dendritic branch while inducing pattern-specific plasticity.
P-TEFb is a factor that stimulates transcriptional elongation in RNA polymerase-II and plays a critical role in regulating cell growth, renewal and differentiation. A new study examined the function of P-TEFb in breast cancer progression and demonstrated the first direct evidence that the transcription elongation machinery and the P-TEFb network play critical roles in regulating tumor progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis by directly controlling the expression of EMT/metastasis-related genes. The study showed that P-TEFb activity is important for EMT, invasion, and metastasis and proved that P-TEFb plays a key role in promoting breast cancer progression.
The article discusses the importance of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and its post-translational modifications in transcription. Specifically, the article focuses on the role of the Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b (P-TEFb) in phosphorylating Ser2 residues of the CTD and the mechanism by which it becomes specific to Ser2. Through in vitro reconstruction of CTD phosphorylation, mass spectrometry analysis, and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq), the researchers discovered that Tyr1 phosphorylation directs the kinase activity of P-TEFb and alters its specificity from Ser5 to Ser2. They also found that Tyr1 phosphorylation generates a heterogeneous CTD modification landscape that expands the CTD’s coding potential. The article describes the various methods used to study CTD modification and the importance of the chemical properties of residues located at the first position of the heptad repeat. Finally, the researchers investigate if Tyr1 phosphorylation impacts subsequent phosphorylation events by reconstructing sequential CTD phosphorylation in vitro. Overall, the article provides insights into the combinatorial CTD phosphorylation code and its role in transcription.
A study of wild sunflowers reveals that floral pigmentation, particularly patterns of ultraviolet (UV) pigments, are largely controlled by regulatory variation affecting a single transcription factor, HaMYB111, which accumulates UV-absorbing flavonol glycosides in ligules. This variation is associated with environmental variables, such as relative humidity. Different patterns of UV pigments are strongly correlated with pollinator preferences. The study also found that the HaMYB111 homologue in Arabidopsis, AtMYB111, plays a fundamental role in controlling flavonol glycoside accumulation in petals. The results demonstrate the dual role of floral UV patterns in pollinator attraction and abiotic response and highlight the complex adaptive balance underlying the evolution of floral traits.
A study used optical coherence tomography to create and analyze finite-element models of coronary plaques to determine the stress concentrations that predict plaque rupture. The study found that the maximal stress within the fibrous cap and overall within the plaque were significantly higher in ruptured plaques compared to non-ruptured ones. Plaque rupture occurred in the immediate proximity of the maximal stress concentrations. Both peak cap stress and maximal plaque stress predicted plaque rupture with excellent accuracy. The study highlights the importance of morpho-mechanic analysis in assessing the disrupting effects of plaque stress and predicting plaque rupture.
Enhanced Gq-mediated signaling in forebrain excitatory neurons during postnatal life can lead to persistent mood-related behavioral changes, according to a study in mice. Researchers found that chemogenetic activation of forebrain excitatory neurons during this period, but not during juvenile or adult windows, increased anxiety-, despair-, and schizophrenia-like behavior in adulthood, and resulted in an enhanced metabolic rate of cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons. This phenomenon recapitulates aspects of consequences of early adversity and highlights the critical importance of the postnatal time window for the establishment of long-lasting changes in response to early-life perturbations.
Loss of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) at pericentromeric satellite repeats is associated with cancer and Immunodeficiency, Centromere and Facial abnormalities (ICF) syndrome, but the specific functions of 5mC at pericentromeres are unclear. A new animal model of pericentromeric hypomethylation was generated by mutating the ICF-gene ZBTB24 in zebrafish. Hypomethylation triggered derepression of pericentromeric transcripts and activation of an interferon-based innate immune response. Injection of pericentromeric RNA into wild-type embryos was sufficient to elicit the same response. These findings suggest that derepression of pericentromeric transcripts may trigger autoimmunity as a consequence of pericentromeric hypomethylation.
Asymmetric cell division (ACD) is a critical process for tissue homeostasis in multicellular organisms. In Drosophila male germline stem cells (GSCs), ACD is ensured by the centrosome orientation checkpoint (COC), which prevents mitotic entry in the presence of incorrectly oriented centrosomes. This study found that Bazooka (Baz) provides a platform for the correct centrosome orientation, and that Baz-centrosome association is the key event that is monitored by the COC. Baz-centrosome docking is a cell cycle-dependent event that occurs just before mitotic entry. The tight association of the Baz patch and the centrosome just before mitotic entry led the authors to hypothesize that such association may be the physical basis for 'correct centrosome orientation' that allows GSCs to enter mitosis. The study found that the Baz patch provides a physical platform for GSC centrosome association to achieve correct centrosome orientation, and that Baz is required for COC at least partially.
Bacteroides, a type of gut bacteria, use surface-exposed lipoproteins to metabolize complex polysaccharides and acquire essential vitamins in the gut. One of these proteins, BtuG, is essential for efficient vitamin B12 transport in B. thetaiotaomicron and can bind the vitamin with femtomolar affinity. BtuG also interacts with BtuB, the outer membrane protein that transports vitamin B12 in bacteria, and determines the ability of B. thetaiotaomicron to transport and persist in the gut. The subcellular localization of BtuG was found to be surface-exposed, and the involvement of the protein in B12 transport makes it a potential target for tackling gut-related illnesses indirectly.
The study used RNA sequencing to identify specific gene expression in different populations of neurons in the hippocampus of mice. The data revealed unexpected variations in transcriptional properties and identities of cell classes and regions previously untested. The generated open resource will act as a roadmap relating molecules to cells, circuits, and computation in the hippocampus. Overall, the study provides unparalleled insight into the transcriptional organization of the hippocampus, providing a molecular blueprint to predict and investigate phenotypes at the cellular, systems, and behavioral levels.
A study has found that the T-box transcription factor TBX5 is critical for cellular calcium homeostasis and is linked to an increased risk of atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common human arrhythmia. The study found that a decrease in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) calcium ATPase (SERCA2)-mediated SR calcium uptake resulted in cardiomyocyte ectopy and AF. The study also found that phospholamban removal normalized SERCA function, suggesting that targeting calcium handling pathways may be a treatment approach for a subpopulation of AF patients. The study used adult-specific Tbx5 knockout mice to demonstrate primary spontaneous and sustained AF. Atrial fibrillation affects more than 33 million people globally and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality due to thromboembolic events, heart failure, and sudden cardiac death.
Scientists have discovered a way to generate pluripotent-like cells across multiple non-mammalian species using mammalian genes. This finding could help generate stem cells for transgenic animals, including birds, fish and flies. Stem cells provide a powerful tool for studying development, tissue regeneration, disease mechanisms, and gene therapeutic approaches. Until now, the process of generating and studying stem cells in certain species has been difficult, but the discovery that simple over-expression of four genes can induce a partially reprogrammed pluripotent stem cell state in vertebrate and invertebrate model organisms, including mammals, birds, fish, and flies, could make stem cell research much more tractable.
A study has found that the mechanical properties of the environment in which cardiac cells are cultured - the underlying matrix - can regulate the way the cells mature. Researchers showed that neonatal cardiac cells cultured on rigid surfaces resulted in increased organization of myoskeletal structures, decreased cell-cycle activity, and a spread morphology, whereas compliant elastic matrices resulted in the reverse, including increased cell-cycle activity and clonal expansion (multiple cell divisions), while promoting the features of “dedifferentiation” or the ability to regenerate. Researchers state that the findings may be used to design new cardiac regenerative approaches.
The study takes a functional genomics approach to understanding the mechanism of congenital heart disease (CHD) at the chromatin level by using the technique of DNA adenine methyltransferase identification (DamID) to identify target genes of NKX2-5 wild type and mutant proteins mimicking those found in patients with CHD. While binding of severe NKX2-5 mutants to targets was compromised, they nonetheless associated with hundreds of targets including many normally bound by NKX2-5 wild type and could regulate a subset of these in cellular assays. The study suggests that CHD is caused by haploinsufficiency and an inability of mutant proteins to recognize target genes, and most CHD mutations lie outside of the HD.
The small RNA RydC is an example of a riboregulator that modulates gene expression, and its activities are facilitated by the RNA chaperone Hfq. The crystal structure of RydC in complex with E. coli Hfq has been determined, showing how the protein interacts with and presents the sRNA for target recognition. The study proposes a model for a dynamic effector complex comprising Hfq, small RNA, and the cognate mRNA target. Bacterial sRNAs control expression of a distinct set of target mRNAs, which they recognise with high specificity and apparent precision, and their contributions enrich the computational complexity and repertoire of regulatory circuits. The crystal structure of the RydC-Hfq complex, together with biochemical and in vivo data, defines key interactions and suggests a hypothetical model for how the sRNA and mRNA targets might be matched through Hfq binding.
The hippocampus is involved in creating episodic memories and different subregions of the hippocampus have specific functions. The dentate gyrus (DG) is thought to be responsible for pattern separation, creating distinct representations of similar inputs. How the DG accomplishes this is not fully understood, but this study showed that novel populations of dentate granule cells (DGCs) are selected to represent new environmental inputs, rather than previously activated DGCs. This process of selecting distinct DGC populations to represent similar inputs is a mechanism for pattern separation. The study used TetTag transgenic mice and examined the population neuronal activity in the hippocampus by examining the expression of immediate early genes (IEGs), which is an indicator of recent neuronal activity. Removing dox treatment effectively induced tau-lacZ expression in neurons of the DG and CA1, allowing the study to test the activity-dependent expression of tau-lacZ markers. More LacZ-tagged neurons were observed in mice exposed to a fear conditioning chamber, suggesting that dox-regulated and activity-dependent expression of LacZ occurs in the hippocampus.
Drosophila melanogaster alters its egg-laying behavior when it encounters parasitoid wasps. The adult Drosophila will reduce their oviposition rate, presumably to avoid wasp–infested environments. The researchers tested whether changes in reproductive behavior could be transferred from exposed teacher flies to naive student conspecifics. They found that naive female flies, never experiencing wasp exposure directly, reduced oviposition when encountering exposed flies. It was also observed that male flies are not necessary or sufficient for the information transfer. The decrease in oviposition of student flies is not due to an effect of the ratio of teacher to student flies. The researchers removed Canton-S pre-exposed teacher females from student His-GFP expressing flies, and placed the teacher-instructed student flies in a new chamber with three new, naive Canton-S flies. In teacher-instructed student flies, reduced oviposition behavior persisted for 24 hr after.
The article discusses the use of magnetoencephalography (MEG) recordings to analyze spontaneous brain activity at high temporal resolution. Using a novel approach, the researchers identified short-lived (100-200ms) brain states with spatial characteristics similar to resting-state networks identified in previous studies. Additionally, they found that within-network functional connectivity is underpinned by rapid fluctuating coordinated neuronal dynamics. The article concludes that the study's findings provide insight into how functional brain networks reorganize and coordinate on a sub-second temporal scale to provide an effective substrate for cognitive processes.
Researchers have found that sensory neurons in the midbrain superior colliculus (SC) of free-flying echolocating bats encode 3D egocentric space, meaning they are able to encode both direction and distance to objects in their environment. The bat's inspection of objects in the physical world sharpens tuning of single neurons and shifts peak responses to represent closer distances. The study, which used wireless neural recordings in combination with an echo model to compute the animal's instantaneous stimulus space, is the first to investigate the behavioral modulation of depth-tuned single unit responses and gamma band oscillations in the SC of a mammal inspecting objects in its physical environment. The findings show the importance of studying freely moving animals in a 3D physical environment to understand the neural underpinnings of sensory-guided behavior.
Researchers conducted genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens in 21 oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines, primarily derived from Asians, to identify genetic vulnerabilities that can be explored as therapeutic targets. They identified known and novel fitness genes and demonstrated that many previously identified OSCC-related cancer genes are non-essential and could have limited therapeutic value, while other fitness genes warrant further investigation for their potential as therapeutic targets. They validated a distinctive dependency on YAP1 and WWTR1 of the Hippo pathway and discovered that OSCCs with WWTR1 dependency signature are significantly associated with biomarkers of favorable response toward immunotherapy.
The document discusses the challenges of comparing adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors for gene therapy and the development of a single-cell AAV engineering pipeline (scAAVengr) to quantify and rank the efficiency of competing AAV vectors across all cell types in the same animal. The scAAVengr pipeline was applied to primates to identify top-performing AAV variants for retinal gene therapy. The pipeline can be applied to any species or tissue for which marker genes can be identified. The efficacy of AAV vectors was evaluated through deep sequencing and analysis of transgene expression levels and cell-type tropism. The pipeline was supported by funding from several organizations and followed ethical guidelines for the use of animals in research.
This study shows that CD4+ dendritic cells (DCs) express high levels of the receptor EBI2 and migrate to its oxysterol ligand, 7α, 25-OHC. Mice lacking EBI2 or the enzymes for generating normal distributions of 7α, 25-OHC have reduced CD4+ DCs, and the remaining cells fail to situate in marginal zone bridging channels in the spleen, which results in a deficiency of CD4+ DCs. EBI2-mediated positioning in bridging channels is required for promoting DC encounter with blood-borne particulate antigen. Upon exposure to antigen, CD4+ DCs move rapidly to the T-B zone interface and promote the induction of helper T cell and antibody responses. These findings establish an essential role for EBI2 in CD4+ DC positioning and homeostasis and in facilitating capture and presentation of blood-borne particulate antigens.
Researchers have developed an automatic behavior analysis pipeline for the cnidarian Hydra vulgaris using machine learning. They imaged freely behaving Hydra, extracted motion and shape features from the videos, and constructed a dictionary of visual features to classify pre-defined behaviors. Using this pipeline, they were able to quantify six basic behaviors in Hydra and found surprisingly similar behavior statistics across animals within the same species, regardless of experimental conditions. The researchers believe this indicates a stable fundamental behavioral repertoire of Hydra reflecting a homeostatic neural control of "housekeeping" behaviors. This could make Hydra relevant to our understanding of the nervous systems of other model organisms.
Lentiviral vectors have been adapted as carriers of designer nuclease proteins like Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) and transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) for use in safe and effective therapeutic gene disruption in cells. ZFNs fused to the N-terminus of Gag containing the phospholipase C-δ1 pleckstrin homology (PH) domain were incorporated in lentiviral particles, producing LPs that trigger gene editing through cellular repair mechanisms involving error-prone non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR). Co-packaging pairs of ZFN proteins with donor RNA in ‘all-in-one’ lentiviral particles co-deliver ZFN proteins and the donor template editing cells. Comparative studies of ZFN activity in predetermined target locus and a known nearby off-target locus demonstrate reduced off-target activity after ZFN protein transduction relative to conventional delivery approaches. TALEN proteins were added to the repertoire of custom-designed nucleases that can be delivered by protein transduction. The findings generate a new platform for genome engineering based on efficient and potentially safer delivery of programmable nucleases.
Researchers have identified a new translocon, a poorly understood ensemble that coordinates the insertion, folding, modification and assembly of most membrane proteins. The translocon consists of the core Sec61 channel and five accessory factors: TMCO1, CCDC47 and the Nicalin-TMEM147-NOMO complex. Cryo-electron microscopy revealed the translocon has a unique central membrane cavity that can assist with multi-pass membrane protein biogenesis. The identification of the new translocon offers a molecular framework for understanding its role in multi-pass membrane protein biogenesis.
A study shows that perinatal brain injuries which cause lasting changes in dopamine function in rodents also occur in humans. The study compared adults who were born very preterm with perinatal brain injury to those born very preterm without perinatal brain injury, and age-matched controls born at full term using [18F]-DOPA PET and structural MRI. Dopamine synthesis capacity was reduced in the perinatal brain injury group relative to those without brain injury and the control group. This is the first evidence linking neonatal hippocampal injury to adult dopamine dysfunction, which provides a potential mechanism linking early life risk factors to adult mental illness.
By conducting a forward genetic screen in Drosophila, researchers identified the E3 ligase Ubr3 as an essential gene for auditory organ development. The study revealed that Ubr3 negatively regulates the mono-ubiquitination of non-muscle Myosin II, a protein associated with hearing loss in humans, and affects the physical interaction between Myosin II and Myosin VIIa, a protein responsible for Usher syndrome type IB. The study shows that ubr3 mutants phenocopy pathogenic variants of Myosin II, and Ubr3 interacts genetically and physically with three Usher syndrome proteins. The authors suggest that their work reveals a novel mechanism that regulates protein complexes affected in two forms of syndromic deafness and suggests a molecular function for Myosin II in auditory organs.
The Insulin/IGF signaling (IIS) pathway is a regulator of aging and proteostasis. The researchers utilized the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to examine how the alteration of aging affected protein SUMOylation. They found that IIS activity promotes the SUMOylation of the germline protein CAR-1, shortening the lifespan and impairing proteostasis. A mutated version of CAR-1, which cannot be SUMOylated, extended lifespan and enhanced proteostasis. A mechanistic analysis indicated that CAR-1 mediates these functions partially through the notch-like receptor glp-1. The researchers uncovered a novel regulatory axis in which SUMOylation is utilized to integrate the aging-controlling functions of the IIS and the germline.
The article discusses the photosynthetic bacteria cyanobacteria and their unique CO2 concentrating mechanism (CCM) that enhances carbon fixation. A mathematical model of the CCM is presented, with an analysis of the parameter regime necessary for efficient carbon fixation. The model takes into account enzyme co-localization and compartmentalization, facilitated CO2 uptake, CO2 scavenging, and HCO3− transport with varying external pH. The paper discusses the efficacy of the CCM as a function of HCO3− transport, carboxysome permeability, and parameters governing CO2 facilitated uptake. The study presents a range of kc and jc values where the CCM is effective and meets criteria for saturating RuBisCO while avoiding wasteful oxygenation reactions.
This study investigates the concept of partner-serving mutations in mutualistic interactions between microorganisms, using a well-mixed community of two engineered yeast strains that exchange essential metabolites. The study demonstrates that a chromosome duplication mutation in one strain that seems to increase the release rate of a beneficial metabolite to the other strain is not actually partner-serving, but rather solely self-serving during long-term growth. The study also proposes an alternative way of quantifying benefit supply rate to partners and discusses the importance of distinguishing mutation types in predicting their evolutionary success. The findings have implications for understanding the evolution of mutualistic interactions in microbial communities.
The article explores whether lattices play a role in how the brain represents information in higher-dimensional stimulus domains, with a particular emphasis on neural representations of physical space. Grid-cell-like neurons whose activity patterns exhibit lattice structures at multiple, nested scales are discussed, and it is suggested that the lattice with the highest packing ratio leads to the highest spatial resolution. The article also discusses the importance of finding the lattice that endows a grid module with maximal Fisher Information and highlights that the specific scale of the lattices can be fixed for this study.
Hsp90 is a molecular chaperone that helps to maintain protein and cellular homeostasis. It interacts with substrate proteins that are already semi-folded to facilitate protein-protein interactions and promote client function in diverse biological pathways. Hsp90 exists as a homodimer with three major domains, and the extent of closed-state accumulation and rate of closure differentiate between Hsp90 homologs. TRAP1 is a mitochondrial Hsp90 homolog, and its crystal structure revealed an ordered extension of the N-terminal beta strand, previously shown to cross over between protomers in the closed state called a 'strap'. In this study, the mechanism of the strap's regulatory function was explored, and it was found that the strap stabilizes the closed state through trans-protomer interactions, and disengagement of cis-protomer contacts from the apo state is rate-limiting for closure and ATP hydrolysis. The strap is conserved in higher eukaryotes, but absent from yeast and prokaryotes, allowing it to regulate the thermal and kinetic sensitivity of Hsp90s to meet the demands of unique cellular and organismal environments.
Hippocampal neurons in transgenic mice models of tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease, do not fire at specific locations but display robust firing sequences during familiar or novel trajectories, and free exploration of open spaces. This suggests that hippocampal circuits are overwhelmed by internal information and unable to encode spatial memories due to tau pathology and/or neurodegeneration. External sensory input along a trajectory drives place cells to fire one after another, which creates a memory code for the trajectory, and the same sequence can be reactivated during future memory recall. In transgenic mice, despite unstable firing locations, tau neurons maintained a stable firing sequence during familiar trajectories. Tau neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal loss may cause hippocampal neurons to fire internally instead of encoding external space.
TAF4 subunit of TFIID is necessary for the formation of the liver post-natal gene expression program. TAF4 promotes pre-initiation complex (PIC) formation at post-natal expressed liver function genes and down-regulates a subset of embryonic expressed genes through RNA polymerase II pausing. The TAF4–TAF12 heterodimer interacts directly with HNF4A and is required to maintain HNF4A-directed embryonic gene expression at post-natal stages and promotes HNF4A occupancy of functional cis-regulatory elements adjacent to the transcription start sites of post-natal expressed genes.This study shows that TAF4 is essential for activation of the post-natal hepatocyte gene expression program &amp; TAF4 is necessary for liver function in mice.
Researchers have identified key sex-specific neurons that mediate copulation in the fruit fly Drosophila, and defined a sexually dimorphic motor circuit in the male abdominal ganglion that mediates this action. The sexually dimorphic circuit is composed of three neuronal classes—motor neurons, interneurons and mechanosensory neurons—that control the mechanics of copulation. The results suggest a model in which doublesex (dsx) configures a sexually dimorphic sensorimotor circuit that allows the male to successfully execute the correct action sequence for both genital attachment and detachment. Male reproductive behaviours in Drosophila are controlled by neurons expressing the two key sex determination genes, dsx and fruitless (fru), the male-specific isoforms of which specify male-specific neurons.
Researchers have generated a whole-genome, deep-sequencing dataset to study the evolution of the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) populations in nine untreated patients, with 6-12 longitudinal samples per patient spanning 5-8 years of infection. They discovered that the evolution of HIV-1 ultimately takes place within infected individuals, and can be observed directly in longitudinal samples of virus populations from the same individual. HIV-1 is a paradigmatic example of a rapidly adapting population with high diversity, strong selection and recombination. The researchers quantified the number of HIV-1 genomes that contributed to each sequencing library by PCR-limiting dilution; they performed a number of control experiments to quantify templates and assess the accuracy of estimates of frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP). Their web application, available at hiv.tuebingen.mpg.de, will encourage others to further analyze the data, as it allows browsing the data by patient or by genomic region and provides composite interactive plots to explore how the virus population has changed over time.
RNA-binding proteins PTBP1 and PTBP2 play a crucial role in regulating gene expression through alternative splicing during neuronal development. Research has identified that PTBP1 controls a program of neuronal gene expression and suppresses the activity of the transcription factor Pbx1. Persisting embryonic splicing patterns of synaptic and cytoskeletal proteins during neuronal development are maintained by PTBP2. The study has characterized the PTBP1 splicing program that occurs during early neuronal differentiation using mouse embryonic stem cell culture. The program comprises alternative splicing events that regulate the switch in splicing of the homeodomain transcription factor Pbx1 to induce a neuronal transcriptional program early in neuronal development. The article highlights the importance of alternative splicing in regulating gene expression during tissue development and how specialized pre-mRNA binding proteins (RBPs) control splicing patterns during cellular differentiation.
The article discusses the mechanism of intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is responsible for transporting cargo within cilia. The authors focus on the role of WDR35/IFT121, a component of the IFT-A complex, which is responsible for retrograde transport in cilia. They show that WDR35 is involved in delivering essential cargo from vesicles to cilia, and that recombinant non-core IFT-As can bind directly to lipids. They also discuss how IFT proteins have been observed to localize to various endomembranes and vesicular compartments outside cilia, and how IFT complex proteins have been found to accumulate beyond the length of the acetylated axoneme. Overall, the article sheds light on the complex process of ciliogenesis and the role of IFT in this process.
The TRPV1 channels are responsible for detecting pain and noxious input. They have two gates in their permeation pathway, one at the intracellular entrance and one at the selectivity filter. The fluorescent non-canonical amino acid coumarin-tyrosine was genetically encoded at Y671 to study channel gating. Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy was used to image the conformational dynamics of the channels in live cells. Results showed changes in photon counts and optical fluctuations when the channel was activated by capsaicin, suggesting a dynamic selectivity filter that may serve as a gate for permeation. The use of genetically encoded fluorophores, such as coumarin, could be useful for studying membrane protein conformational changes and ion channel motions, as it provides a sensitive and specific marker for activity in live cells.
The document discusses systemic light chain amyloidosis, a condition where an overexpressed antibody light chain forms fibrils that deposit in organs and cause their failure. The study focuses on a patient-derived amyloidogenic LC with 11 mutations in the VL domain, which led to the identification of the key mutation responsible for fibril formation. The destabilizing mutation disrupts a hydrophobic network and triggers conformational changes that turn the LC pathogenic. The study highlights how changes in stability alone cannot explain the differences in fibril formation propensity, and the underlying reason for VL variants in AL patients is still largely enigmatic.
Axonal branching is a process wherein a neuron connects with multiple targets, increasing the complexity of the neuronal circuit. While axonal branching is well described, the mechanisms that control it remain largely unknown. This study focuses on axonal branch refinement of the dorsal cluster neurons in the CNS of Drosophila. The study finds that axonal branching occurs through a process of excessive growth followed by pruning. The establishment of functional neuronal networks relies on the appropriate incorporation of a neuron into a developing circuit. The study identifies the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) as necessary for DCN branch dynamics and the final branching pattern. The study confirms that EGFR shows intrinsic differential distribution between individual developing DCN axonal branches and that the appropriate level of signaling is required for proper axonal branching. Mechanistically, the EGFR acts via regulating actin cytoskeleton dynamics, and not the canonical mitogen activated kinase pathway. The inhibition of EGFR signaling leads to a dramatic reduction in axonal branch dynamics, leading to the failure of axonal branch pruning.
Changes in temperature can affect biochemical reaction rates, which can in turn affect neural processing. In poikilothermic animals (animals whose internal temperature varies with the environment), mechanisms have evolved to retain functionality under varying temperatures. Grasshopper auditory receptor neurons are able to respond to sounds in a temperature-compensated manner despite a moderate dependence on temperature. This type of temperature compensation comes from cell-intrinsic processes and does not come with an additional metabolic cost to spike generation. The firing rate-based information transfer is likely to increase with temperature. This study aims to identify mechanisms and limitations of cellular temperature compensation at the level of firing rates. The goal is to understand how single-cell mechanisms are used to cope with multiple constraints in parallel.
MR-Base is a platform that integrates a curated database of complete Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and software that automates 2-sample Mendelian randomization (2SMR). The platform includes several sensitivity analyses for assessing the impact of horizontal pleiotropy and other violations of assumptions, and the database comprises 11 billion single nucleotide polymorphism-trait associations from 1673 GWAS. MR-Base enables efficient evaluation in phenome-wide association studies, and can be used for a wide variety of applications including MR, PheWAS, summary-based transcriptome-wide and methylome-wide association studies, and linkage disequilibrium regression. The database includes complete summary data for thousands of phenotypes, and is regularly updated.
The movement of primary cilia, a surface-exposed compartment consisting of a microtubule-based axoneme ensheathed within a plasma membrane protrusion, is important for signalling cascades. The assembly of cilia relies on intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is a process in which moving IFT trains bring cargo, such as tubulin and axonemal precursors, to the tip of the axoneme by kinesin II motor-powered transport along axonemal microtubules. The movement of membrane proteins inside primary cilia is little known besides a possible role for motor-driven IFT. In order to characterise these dynamics, single molecules of Somatostatin Receptor 3 and Smoothened were imaged in the ciliary membrane. While IFT trains moved processively from one end of the cilium to the other, single Somatostatin Receptor 3 and Smoothened underwent mostly diffusive behaviour interspersed with short periods of directional movements, spending less than a third of their time undergoing active transport. Finally, Somatostatin Receptor 3 and IFT movements were able to be uncoupled by perturbing either membrane protein diffusion or active transport, suggesting that ciliary membrane proteins move predominantly by diffusion, and attachment to IFT trains is transient and stochastic rather than processive or spatially determined.
The article discusses the discovery of the PTRN-1 protein, a member of the conserved CAMSAP family of microtubule minus end-binding proteins, which plays an important role in stabilising microtubules in neurons. The authors used live fluorescence microscopy and electron microscopy to study the protein's effect on microtubules in C. elegans and found that PTRN-1 promoted microtubule stability and polymerisation in neurites. Further, the loss of ptrn-1 function resulted in defective neurite branching and mislocalisation of synaptic vesicles, indicating an important role in neuron morphology and function. The article highlights the importance of microtubules in providing structural support, acting as tracks for molecular motors and promoting the establishment and maintenance of neuronal polarity. The article also discusses the structure of the CAMSAP family of proteins and their importance in stabilising microtubules in vivo.
The production of proteins requires a lot of energy and can result in fitness costs if unneeded proteins are overexpressed. To better understand the molecular mechanisms that shape protein burden, researchers conducted a genetic interaction screen in yeast and found that impairment of specific molecular chaperones increased protein burden. Other factors that contributed to protein burden included translation elongation, transcriptional elongation, and amino acid availability. Additionally, temperature stress and increased mistranslation further enhanced protein burden. The study suggests that molecular chaperones play a critical role in buffering protein burden and enabling tolerance to massive changes in genomic expression.
Zinc is an essential micronutrient for growth and proliferation, and its deficiency leads to arrested cell cycles and impaired organismal growth. However, the precise mechanisms of how zinc deficiency affects cell cycles remain poorly understood. This study uses fluorescent reporters, high-throughput microscopy, and quantitative analysis to induce subtle zinc perturbations in naturally cycling cells and track them throughout division. The researchers found that zinc deficiency induces quiescence and resupply stimulates synchronized cell cycle reentry. They also discovered that the position of cells within the cell cycle determines whether they go quiescent or enter another cell cycle but stall in S-phase. Stalled cells exhibited prolonged S-phase, DNA synthesis defects, and increased DNA damage levels, highlighting zinc's role in maintaining genome integrity. Zinc deficiency-induced quiescence occurs independently of DNA-damage response pathways and is distinct from mitogen removal and spontaneous quiescence. Ultimately, this study provides new insights into when zinc is required during the mammalian cell cycle and the consequences of insufficient levels.
Researchers have identified a retrotransposon, a type of transposable genetic element, that is highly transcribed in rice roots and whose spliced transcript acts as a target mimic for a microRNA called miR171. The retrotransposon-derived transcripts act as decoys for miR171, triggering its degradation and resulting in the root-specific accumulation of SCARECROW-Like mRNAs. The study suggests that transposable elements can regulate the expression of neighbouring genes and influence ectopic loci. The discovery highlights the role of retrotransposons as potential regulators of rice development and could have implications for genetic engineering of crops.
The document describes the importance of diatoms in aquatic ecosystems and their response to diverse stress conditions. The study investigates cellular responses to environmental stress at the single-cell level using the redox sensor roGFP targeted to various organelles in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Results reveal distinct subpopulations of sensitive oxidized cells and resilient reduced cells in the chloroplast in response to H2O2 and high light. Early oxidation in the chloroplast preceded commitment to cell death and can be used for sensing stress cues and regulating cell fate. Cell-to-cell variability could result in different cellular strategies employed by the population to cope with environmental stress. This study provides important insights into diatoms’ sensitivity to environmental stressors in the ocean.
Prions are self-propagating protein aggregates known to cause fatal neurological diseases in mammals. They have also been found in fungi, where they have heritable, protein-based genetic elements. A previous study showed that the yeast prion protein Sup35 can access the prion conformation in E. coli. In the current study, researchers demonstrated that E. coli can propagate the Sup35 prion under conditions that do not permit its de novo formation. The study also showed that the propagation required the disaggregase activity of ClpB chaperone. Prion propagation in yeast requires Hsp104, and prior studies have come to conflicting conclusions about ClpB's ability to participate in this process. The demonstration of ClpB-dependent prion propagation in E. coli suggests that the cytoplasmic milieu and a molecular machine are poised to support protein-based heredity in the bacterial domain of life. Overall, the findings suggest that the paradigm of protein-based heredity may be more ancient than previously inferred.
Budding yeast uses two mechanisms to position the spindle along the mother-bud axis, in order to ensure that cytokinesis only occurs after the nucleus has been partitioned between the mother cell and bud. Cells with incorrect spindle position delay the cell cycle progression, preventing exit from mitosis. In order to exit from mitosis, a correctly positioned spindle is required rather than an incorrect one inhibiting it. The mechanism of exit from mitosis is regulated by the essential phosphatase Cdc14, which is released during later stages of anaphase, and influenced by two pathways – the Cdc14 early anaphase release network and the mitotic exit network (MEN). The checkpoint response that prevents exit from mitosis in response to spindle misposition is called the spindle position checkpoint (SPoC). Spindle position regulates MEN activity, and two competing models have been proposed to explain how spindle position regulates MEN activity: the 'zone model' and the 'cMT-budneck model'. However, analysis conducted has shown evidence to support the zone model and refute the cMT-budneck model.
Drosophila flies have better vision than previously thought due to their photoreceptors being able to capture more information in time than predicted from classic theories. R1-R6 photoreceptors have the capacity to generate fast, high-contrast bursts of information resembling their light input during saccadic behaviors. This allows them to see moving objects at saccadic speeds beyond the predicted motion-blur-limit. By actively modulating light input and photoreceptor output, photomechanical photoreceptor contractions work together with refractory sampling to improve spatial acuity and sharpen retinal images. Incorporating this opto-mechano-electric mechanism into a 'microsaccadic sampling'-model predicts that Drosophila can see more than four times finer details than their eyes' spatial sampling limit. These findings change our understanding of insect vision and show an important relationship between eye movements and visual acuity.
Researchers have developed a non-invasive method for observing neural activity in deep areas of the mouse brain using two-photon calcium imaging. The technique involves using a laser whose aperture has been under-filled to limit the angle of emitted light and reduce the effect of scattering within tissue. While previous experiments have achieved a depth of up to 900 µm below the cortical surface without cortical invasion, the new method enabled researchers to detect activity up to 1,200 µm deep in areas including the medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampal CA1 region. In addition, the researchers found that neural activity was higher in the prelimbic area than in the layer 2/3 of the secondary motor area when water was delivered at a regular interval.
The Human Neocortical Neurosolver (HNN) is a software designed to help researchers and clinicians interpret the neural origins of Magneto- and Electro-encephalography (MEG/EEG) signals. It accounts for the biophysical origins of electrical currents generating MEG/EEG using a neocortical circuit model, making it possible for users to simulate signals and manipulate parameters to develop and test hypotheses on a signal's origin. HNN is a hypothesis development and testing tool that provides circuit-level predictions that can be informed by invasive recordings and/or other imaging modalities. It has successfully interpreted the mechanisms and meaning of common EEG signals and can be used to study the impact of non-invasive brain stimulation. The software has a user-friendly graphical interface and is free and publicly available.
CIDEA is a lipid droplet protein found in brown adipocytes that promotes enlargement of lipid droplets, which store neutral lipids. In this study, researchers found that an amphipathic helix in CIDEA facilitates its embedding in the lipid droplet phospholipid monolayer and binds phosphatidic acid to promote cellular lipid transfer for the enlargement of lipid droplets. The study also showed that CIDEA has a crucial role in adipocyte differentiation and facilitates the coupling of lipolysis and lipogenesis in activated brown fat. The research provides a detailed understanding of the different steps required for lipid droplet enlargement and may help in the development of new treatments for metabolic disorders.
Research has led to the discovery of a pheromone signaling system in Drosophila larvae that is associated with social cues, such as aggregation and navigation. The larvae produce two fatty acids that are attractive to others, and a single chemosensory neuron detects these molecules. Two genes, ppk23 and ppk29, from the pickpocket family of DEG/ENaC channel subunits, are responsible for responding to the pheromones. While previous studies have focused on sex-related pheromones in Drosophila, this research highlights how pheromones also play a critical role in the survival of many insects.
The document discusses the use of optogenetics to stimulate neuroregeneration in live Drosophila larvae. The study focuses on the Raf/MEK/ERK and AKT signaling pathways and their contribution to axon regeneration and functional recovery in the peripheral and central nervous systems. The use of non-neuronal optogenetics allows for precise control of signaling subcircuits and spatially guided axon regrowth. The study also highlights the importance of signaling kinetics in the functional outcome of neurotrophic signaling pathways. The authors use optoRaf and optoAKT to activate these signaling pathways and demonstrate that their activation leads to axon regrowth and functional recovery in damaged neurons. The study provides evidence that non-neuronal optogenetics can be a powerful tool in the intervention of neural damage with improved precision.
Individuals respond differently to traumatic injury, such as stroke or brain injury, making outcomes difficult to predict. This study found that hidden variability in neural circuits may be a contributing factor to these differences. Using the mollusc Tritonia diomedea, researchers found that subtle differences between animals within the neural circuit underlying swimming behavior had no impact on the behavior under normal conditions, but caused differential vulnerability of the behavior to a particular brain lesion. This variability was caused by differences in synaptic properties, which were of no consequence under ordinary conditions but became functionally relevant only when the system was challenged by injury. These results suggest that neural circuit differences could serve as hidden phenotypes for predicting the behavioral outcome of neural damage.
The document discusses the mechanism of bicoid mRNA localization in Drosophila oocytes during embryonic patterning. The mRNA localizes to the anterior of the oocyte and is transported by Dynein-dependent movements. However, its localization does not depend on microtubules as it is stably anchored at the anterior through random active transport and anterior anchoring. Bicoid mRNA forms 110-120 nm particles with variable RNA content, and it is packaged for transport and anchoring. The document also describes the previously known role of mRNA localization in providing patterning signals for embryonic axes in organisms like Drosophila and Xenopus. The study provides evidence to suggest that Bicoid mRNA particles are transported by Dynein, and this transportation speed is reduced when Dynein is mutated.
A protein called cyclophilin A (CypA) has been found to play a critical positive role in boosting antiviral immune responses, according to a study published in eLife. Researchers discovered that CypA helped increase interaction between RIG-I and its E3 ubiquitin ligase, TRIM25, leading to enhanced ubiquitination of RIG-I that boosted recruitment to MAVS, thereby inducing type I interferons (IFNs) against RNA virus infection. The absence of CypA led to impaired RIG-I-mediated type I IFN production and increased viral replication in human cells and mice. As a result, the findings reveal that CypA plays an important role in boosting antiviral immune response by controlling the ubiquitination of RIG-I and MAVS.
Researchers studied 2566 COVID-19 patients at five hospitals in Massachusetts to develop predictive models for the level of care patients would require based on clinical and laboratory data. They achieved high accuracy rates for predicting hospitalization, ICU care, and mechanical ventilation using various classification methods, and identified vital signs, age, BMI, dyspnea, and comorbidities as the most important predictors for hospitalization while chest imaging and admission laboratory results were most significant in predicting ICU admissions and mechanical ventilation. The study aims to assist clinicians in identifying patients at risk of decompensation, but the models are not meant to replace clinical judgment.
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) plays a crucial role in the transformation of viral RNA into DNA and is a primary target for AIDS treatment. The RT precursor undergoes a complex maturation process, which includes proteolysis and conformational adjustments, to form a p66/p51 heterodimer. A recent study using NMR and molecular dynamics simulations investigated the conformational maturation process of RT, focusing on the slower processes of proteolysis and conformational adjustments. The study proposed a conformational selection model for the initial dimerization event, which suggests that the major reorganization of the polymerase subdomains interconverting the two subunits of the RT homodimer occurs prior to dimer formation. The study offers a more complete understanding of the complex conformational maturation processes leading to the formation of the p66/p51 RT heterodimer.
The ability to revise one's confidence in a preceding choice is important for adaptive decision making, but the neural mechanisms underpinning this process are not well-known. This study shows that the same decision-making signal that triggers the initial choice continues to evolve after commitment and determines the timing and accuracy of error detection reports, indicating that metacognitive judgments are not solely based on sensory evidence. The study also shows that post-decision accumulation of evidence is not only dependent on feedforward sensory inputs but is also influenced by the output of medial frontal structures implicated in performance monitoring and executive control. The study used electroencephalographic (EEG) data from a Go/No-Go response inhibition task and demonstrates that neural evidence accumulation does persist after commitment to the first-order decision, and its rate determines the probability and timing of error detection.
Plants have evolved control mechanisms to block germination under unfavourable conditions in order to preserve the highly protected embryonic state. While previous studies have focused on how seeds respond to abiotic stresses, little is known about how biotic factors may impact seed germination. A recent study found that Arabidopsis seed germination is blocked in the presence of the plant pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa due to the release of a biotic compound, L-2-amino-4-methoxy-trans-3-butenoic acid (AMB), which triggers germination arrest. AMB production is controlled by the quorum sensing system IQS in P. aeruginosa. This germination arrest protects the seedlings from damage induced by AMB and exposure to the pathogen. The study also investigated how the compound triggers DELLA-dependent germination arrest by promoting the accumulation of the germination repressor ABI5 in a GA-independent manner.
Researchers have characterized a light-gated chloride channel called GtACR2 in mouse cortical neurons, finding that activation of the channel inhibits the soma but depolarizes presynaptic terminals, resulting in neurotransmitter release. This effect was also observed with other light-gated chloride channels. These findings provide insight into the necessity of precisely determining the effects of light-gated ion channels or pumps under specific experimental conditions and also suggest that the targeted manipulation of neural activity is a powerful approach in neuroscience. A hybrid somatodendritic targeting motif was created and shown to enhance the somatic photocurrent while reducing GtACR2-induced neurotransmitter release. The researchers suggest that light-gated chloride channels can be a useful tool for studying the physiological functions of chloride electrochemical gradients in specific brain regions or subcellular domains that are otherwise difficult to access.
Researchers report the identification and characterization of a new long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) called LAST, which acts as a stabilizer of CCND1 mRNA, a critical regulator of cell cycle progression. The lncRNA works by cooperating with CNBP to bind to the 5' untranslated region of CCND1 mRNA to protect it against nuclease degradation. Knockdown of LAST caused a decrease in tumor formation, while ectopic expression of it induced tumor formation, suggesting an oncogenic function. The study also highlights the role of c-Myc, a master transcription factor that regulates approximately 10-15% of genes in the genome, in regulating the expression of LAST.
A new study has shown that many genes can code for both large and small proteins, and that these small proteins play important roles in health and disease. The study reanalyzed several eukaryotic transcriptomes to identify previously unannotated ORFs, which are potential protein coding sequences. The majority of these were small, with less than 100 amino acids. The study also found thousands of alternative proteins, which were detected in proteomic datasets. The presence of these small proteins has important implications for our understanding of gene functions and the process of evolutionary innovation.
The document introduces a new approach called Microscopic Imaging of Epigenetic Landscapes (MIEL) for high-content drug screening in the field of epigenetics. MIEL captures nuclear staining patterns of epigenetic marks and employs machine learning to accurately distinguish such patterns. The approach was validated across multiple cell lines and using dose-response curves to ensure its fidelity and robustness for drug discovery. MIEL can identify and classify epigenetically active drugs and rank candidate drugs by their ability to produce desired epigenetic alterations. The document also highlights the limitations of current methods for collecting information about the epigenetic landscape and the advantages of high-content screening coupled with image processing tools and machine learning in drug discovery. The approach was tested using a library of 222 epigenetically active compounds and compared to current thresholding methods, demonstrating MIEL's increased detection sensitivity over standard thresholding. MIEL's ability to group compounds by function and identify nonspecific effects through comparison with well-defined controls is also discussed.
New research into the impact of aversive events on dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the brain in mice has shown that the response of dopamine neurons is varied, depending on the animal’s behavioural state and its reward context. Research also revealed that in low reward contexts, most dopamine neurons were exclusively inhibited by aversive events, sending out a signal relating to value prediction errors (VPEs). In contrast, in high reward contexts, dopamine neurons acquired a short-latency excitation masking the VPE. The results indicate that different modes of dopamine signalling are adaptive for different environments.
Researchers have identified a signal that promotes the self-renewal of intestinal stem cells in the Drosophila adult midgut. They found that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) serves as a niche signal for ISC self-renewal, activating two BMP ligands called Dpp and Gbb produced by enterocytes to promote ISC self-renewal by antagonizing Notch signalling. BMP exists in an apical-basal activity gradient and basement membrane-associated collagen restricts higher BMP signalling to ISCs, helping to regulate ISC number in response to physiological and pathological stimuli. The researchers believe that the employment of gut epithelia as a niche for stem cell self-renewal may provide a mechanism for direct communication between the niche and the environment.
HNF4α, a transcription factor expressed in the liver, kidney, pancreas, stomach and intestine, has been linked to colitis and colon cancer in humans but the role of different HNF4α isoforms, which arise from two separate promoters, in these conditions has been unclear. However, a new study has investigated the extent to which the different isoforms perform non-redundant functions in the mouse colon under conditions of stress. Results indicate that P1-HNF4α is expressed primarily in the differentiated compartment of mouse colonic crypt, while P2-HNF4α is in the proliferative compartment. The testing of mice subjected to experimental colitis (DSS) and colitis-associated colon cancer (AOM+DSS), has shown that P1- and P2-HNF4α isoforms interact with distinct sets of proteins, regulate the expression of unique sets of target genes, and play distinct roles during pathological conditions such as colitis and colon cancer. The study suggests that HNF4α isoforms perform non-redundant functions in the colon indicating their importance in colitis and colon cancer.
A study has shown that the magnitude of androgen receptor (AR) signalling output, rather than genetic alteration or expression level, contributes to antiandrogen resistance in prostate cancer through upregulation of the coactivator GREB1. The study found there is a 100-fold heterogeneity in AR output in human prostate cancer cell lines, and cells with high AR output have reduced sensitivity to enzalutamide. The researchers suggest that GREB1 is a candidate driver of enzalutamide resistance through a novel feedforward mechanism. Clinically, they observed heterogeneous KLK3 and AR expression in primary cancers. Further investigation revealed that GREB1 functions as an AR coactivator through promoting interaction between AR and cofactors, and enhancing AR DNA binding. Knockdown of GREB1 restored enzalutamide sensitivity. The study implicates GREB1 as an AR signal amplifier that contributes to prostate cancer disease progression and antiandrogen resistance.
Pediatric neural tumors are often initiated during early development and can undergo very rapid transformation. However, the molecular basis of this early malignant susceptibility is unknown. Drosophila was used as a model to investigate the malignant potential of neural tumors with early developmental origins. The researchers found that intermediate progenitors are prone to malignancy only when born during an early window of development while expressing the transcription factor Chinmo , and the mRNA-binding proteins Imp/IGF2BP and Lin-28. These genes compose an oncogenic module that is co-opted upon dedifferentiation of early-born intermediate progenitors to drive unlimited tumor growth. Late larvae have transcription factors in neural stem cells that silence the module, thereby limiting mitotic potential and terminating the window of malignant susceptibility. This study provides a model that may help understand the ontogeny of human tumors with early developmental origins.
A study has identified a functional genetic variant, rs1690789, that may regulate TGFB2 expression in human fibroblasts and contribute to the genetic predisposition to emphysema. The study performed the largest genome-wide association study of emphysema patterns to date, identifying ten GWAS loci, and found that emphysema-related genetic variation affects TGF-β signalling. The study integrated the GWAS results with large-scale genome-wide expression quantitative trait loci, cell type epigenomic data, and chromatin conformation capture data to identify candidate regulatory regions, tissues, and cell types of interest for more detailed functional characterisation. The study found that fibroblasts and fetal lung tissue were the most commonly enriched cell types associated with emphysema patterns.
Researchers have developed a device called "MitoPunch" that enables the transfer of mitochondria, the powerhouses of cells, into mammalian cells in order to study the interactions between the mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA. The device is versatile, easy to use and can produce both immortalised and non-immortal human cells with specific mitochondrial and nuclear DNA combinations. The MitoPunch device generates pressure to deliver mitochondria into cells, and in comparison to other methods, generates few dsRed-spots, causing less plasma membrane disruption. The generated SIMR (stable isolated mitochondrial recipient) clones can be used in studying the interactions between mitochondrial and nuclear DNA, as well as the possibility of replacing deleterious mtDNA.
The article discusses how heat stress promotes longevity in yeast by relaxing the retention of DNA circles, which act as aging factors in the mother cell. This effect is dependent on the PKA and Tor1 pathways, downstream of stress-response kinase Pkc1. The retention of aging factors in the mother cell relies on their anchorage into the ER-membrane, and retention of the aggregation precursors relies on their membrane attachment through the farnesylated chaperone Ydj1. Yeast cells modulate their longevity in response to environmental signals by downregulating the retention of aging factors in the mother cell, and mutants affecting the retention of DNA circles in the mother cell are long-lived. The article also discusses how asymmetric division generates both one naive but rejuvenated and one committed but aging daughter cell.
The document discusses how sleep plays a crucial role in the consolidation of newly-acquired procedural memory, particularly for motor skills. The mechanisms by which motor memory traces develop during sleep remain controversial in humans, and several mechanistic hypotheses have been proposed regarding the contribution of sleep in the memory process. One pioneering sleep-dependent consolidation model proposes that the repeated reactivation of a recently formed memory representation during sleep leads to a gradual strengthening of the learning-related connections. Another model, the systems consolidation hypothesis, proposes that sleep engages an active reorganization process that stabilizes the labile neural representation of a novel skill into a consolidated memory trace. Finally, an alternative model, the synaptic homeostasis hypothesis, proposes that local neuronal networks are potentiated and eventually become saturated during learning, and sleep is involved in the restoration of these local networks by downscaling the strength of synaptic connections. The study used simultaneous EEG and fMRI to identify the relative contributions of these hypotheses to the consolidation of procedural memory in humans. The study found that NREM sleep is necessary for two complementary processes: the restoration and reorganization of newly-learned information during sleep, which underlie human motor memory consolidation.
Researchers have measured the expression limits of 29 glycolytic proteins to determine whether they cause growth defects triggered by the protein burden. They found that most glycolytic proteins were expressed up to around 15% of the total cellular protein, the same limit previously identified for the harmless green fluorescent protein (GFP). Ordered by expression limit, some proteins had low expression limits that resulted from localization and metabolic perturbations. To assess whether overexpression was harmful to cellular growth, the study identified a framework for distinguishing between harmful and non-harmful proteins. The factors causing harmful effects that restrict expression and the mechanisms that repress protein expression to prevent metabolic perturbations in the glycolytic pathway were also examined.
This document explores the emergence of cooperation through the sharing of public goods among microorganisms. The success of cooperation depends on the benefits and costs of the public good and the amount retained by each producer and their neighbors, which can be quantified using a simple relation. The diffusion of the public good introduces new phenomena to be modeled explicitly through colony geometry and public good diffusion described by graphs. The efficacy of cooperation is favored for small diffusion rates, low colony dimensionality, and small rates of decay of the public good. The study finds that cooperation can be supported by spatial or group clustering, which facilitates clustering and benefit-sharing among cooperators.
The enzyme γ-secretase, which is essential in the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP), is responsible for the pathological condition of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Mutations in presenilin 1 (PS1) lead to the early onset of familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD). In a study, neurons that expressed PS1 variants or were functionally deficient were discovered to enhance axodendritic outgrowth due to increased levels of intracellular APP-CTF. The APP expression is essential for exuberant neurite outgrowth and hippocampal axonal sprouting observed in knock-in mice expressing FAD-linked PS1 mutations. APP-CTF accumulation initiates the CREB signaling cascade through an association with the Gαs protein, leading to a selective APP gain-of-function that could impact on axodendritic connectivity and contribute to aberrant axonal sprouting observed in AD patients.
Twinfilin is a protein that binds to capping protein (CP), which limits the polymerization of actin filaments. The C-terminal tail of Twinfilin contains a CP-interacting (CPI) motif, which identifies it as a novel CPI-motif protein. Twinfilin and the CPI-motif protein CARMIL have overlapping binding sites on CP, but Twinfilin binds competitively with CARMIL to CP, protecting CP from barbed-end displacement by CARMIL. Twinfilin also accelerates dissociation of the CP inhibitor V-1, restoring CP to an active capping state. Knockdowns of Twinfilin and CP each cause similar defects in cell morphology. Twinfilin is the first "pro-capping" ligand of CP, leading to revisions in our understanding of the CP regulatory cycle.
The CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering technique has transformed high-throughput functional genomic screens, but recent work has questioned its efficiency in TP53 wild-type human cells due to a p53-mediated DNA damage response. To directly assess the impact of p53 status on CRISPR-Cas9 screen performance, parallel CRISPR-Cas9 screens were carried out in wild-type and TP53 knockout human retinal pigment epithelial cells using a dual guide RNA library targeting 852 DDR-associated genes. The results demonstrate that functional p53 status negatively affects the identification of significantly depleted genes, but optimal screen design can enable robust screen performance. Key factors for successful screens in both wild-type and p53-deficient cells were highlighted, including guide RNA library used, gRNA representation, and sequencing depth. The study suggests that successful CRISPR-Cas9 screens can be carried out in both p53-proficient and p53-deficient cells, fostering new biological insights.
The study investigates the activation mechanism of the mitotic kinase Aurora A (AurA) by phosphorylation. Unlike other kinases that are activated through phosphorylation, the activation of AurA does not involve a population switch from DFG-Out to DFG-In state. Instead, phosphorylation activates an inactive DFG-In substate to an active DFG-In substate, leading to catalytic activation. The study suggests that the DFG-Out state in protein kinases has functional importance. Proper control of protein kinases is critical for cellular signal transduction, and disruption of the allosteric mechanisms responsible for controlling kinase activity is a major cause of human cancer. Small molecules that can inhibit specific disease-associated kinases are an integral component of modern cancer therapies. 
Researchers have developed an efficient approach to cataloguing human genes and disease-related alleles via a microscopy-based Cell Painting assay and the profiling of cDNA constructs. The teams hypothesised that information gathered from morphological changes to cell structure could be used to identify new gene functions and their impact on pathways. By using this method, the team was able to build a morphologic map of a gene's function, which enabled the identification of functional connections between the NF-κB pathway and Hippo pathway effectors at the transcriptional level​. This has resulted in the expansion of knowledge of signalling pathways essential to tumour progression and therapy development. 
Researchers have developed a new tool, Local Kinase Inhibition (LoKI), that enables them to selectively block protein kinase activity at specific subcellular locations. The tool uses A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs) to restrict the range of action of protein kinases within intracellular compartments, thus deriving organelle-specific functions from broad specificity kinases. Tests of LoKI on centrosome-localised pools of Plk1 and AurA kinases showed that it inhibited kinase activity and resulted in spindle defects and prolonged mitosis. The versatile precision pharmacology tool enhances our understanding of biological processes and could be further developed as an emerging class of therapeutics.
This article explores the role of cytidine deaminases in the mutation of DNA and the potential risks and benefits of their activity. The deaminases have evolved in humans and primates to restrict viral infection by modifying cytosines to uracil in viral nucleic acids as part of the innate immune defences. However, this mutation activity can also lead to detrimental effects such as oncogenic transformation in cancers. The article demonstrates that the deaminases preferentially target certain regions of the genome, specifically regions exposed by initiating RNA polymerases, without requiring specific cofactors. Cytidine deaminases are also shown to be selective in the sequences they mutate, with each having its own mutation context signature. The article concludes by calling for a better understanding of these processes and their consequences.
A new method has been developed for quantifying the energetics of membrane proteins by monitoring the effects of hundreds of point mutations on helix insertion and self-association within the bacterial inner membrane. The assay uses the TβL genetic screen based on a chimera, in which a membrane-spanning segment is flanked by two antibiotic selection markers – β-lactamase and ToxR, to report on insertion and self-association respectively. Energetics can be divided into two thermodynamic stages, each of which affects membrane protein structure, function and expression levels: the insertion into the membrane of transmembrane segments as alpha-helices, and their association to form helix bundles. The new method allows comprehensive mapping of the sequence determinants of membrane insertion in a single-pass membrane segment, revealing that the hydrophobicity of biological membranes is significantly higher than previously appreciated. The method can also be used to identify the contributions to membrane-protein insertion from positively charged residues. Finally, the method can be used to derive comprehensive mutational landscapes in the membrane domain of Glycophorin A and the ErbB2 oncogene, and identify that insertion and self-association are strongly coupled in receptor homodimers.
The article discusses the use of Bayesian phylogenetic comparative methods to study brain size evolution in primates, especially hominins, and the relative magnitudes of volumetric increases. When analyzing neocortex and cerebellar volumes, the study found that these brain structures have had different evolutionary trajectories in primate evolutionary history. While the neocortex has been studied more, the cerebellum has been found to contribute more to human brain expansion than previously appreciated. Additionally, the study found that body size is a significant predictor of brain size across primates, with larger bodied species having larger brains, though variation remains after accounting for the effect of body size. The study concludes that phylogenetic methods can help to uncover previously hidden patterns in primate brain evolution and can contribute to understanding the evolutionary patterns and processes that bring about extant variation in brain size within the primate clade.
New research has shed light on how the cerebellum controls muscles. The cerebellum is known to be essential in controlling movement, but the way movement is represented by signals in the brain has been a mystery. Using patch-clamp recordings to record the electrical current of a single brain cell, scientists at UCL have discovered that this solitary cell can represent the entire sequence of a basic walking movement. They monitored the spikes of single cerebellar granule cells in mice that were moving on a treadmill, and found that the rate of their spiking correlated with the rate of the animals' “steps”. The team found that spillover currents recruited by glutamate increased in granule cell spiking during movement. They concluded that information about movement is represented with high fidelity during locomotion at the cerebellar input layer and transmitted through the granule cell pathway to downstream Purkinje cells, providing clues as to how the brain controls movement. The findings could potentially help in the development of more sophisticated prosthetic limbs or help to better understand why movement is impaired in disorders such as Parkinson’s disease.
The organization of synaptic inputs on the dendritic tree of cortical neurons plays a major role in neural computations, yet little is known about it. Researchers mapped the spatial organization of glutamatergic synapses in layer 5 pyramidal cells by combining optogenetics and 2-photon calcium imaging in mouse neocortical slices. They discovered that intralaminar inputs form clusters on the basal dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal cells, containing 4 to 14 synapses. This clustering can lead to superlinear summation during synchronous activity. The researchers developed a novel method for identifying individual synapse clusters and characterized cluster parameters to help understand dendritic integration and the arithmetic of synaptic summation.
A study using fruit flies has found that sleep deprivation significantly suppresses aggressive behavior, while other social behaviors remain unaffected. The study suggests that the signaling of the neurotransmitter octopamine transmits changes in aggression upon sleep deprivation. Furthermore, the study found that reduced aggression places sleep-deprived flies at a competitive disadvantage for reproduction. The study highlights the need to understand how sleep and aggression affect each other, as both processes are essential for survival. The findings also suggest that previous sleep experiences strongly modulate aggression with consequences for reproductive fitness.
The ability of neurons to regenerate their axons declines as they mature, but the mechanism underlying this process is unclear. Using an in vitro laser axotomy model, researchers have shown that the decline in intrinsic axon regenerative ability is associated with the selective exclusion of molecules necessary for growth - in particular, rab11 vesicles, which transport many molecules involved in axon growth. These vesicles become excluded from axons by predominant retrograde transport as neurons mature. However, when the researchers overexpressed rab11, it was mistrafficked into proximal axons, resulting in less retraction and enhanced regeneration after axotomy. The study sheds light on a possible mechanism for the loss of intrinsic regeneration ability and suggests that manipulation of transport could enhance regeneration.
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) is a major target of autoantibodies in myasthenia gravis (MG), an autoimmune disease that causes neuromuscular transmission dysfunction. The molecular mechanisms underlying MG have not been fully elucidated. To facilitate the determination of these mechanisms, the first crystal structure of muscle nAChR α1 subunit bound by an EAMG antibody at 2.61 Å resolution and detailed analyses of the molecular interactions in MG were presented. The studies provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of MG and a basis for developing more effective diagnosis and treatment for this debilitating disease.
A study of smallholder poultry farms in southern Vietnam found that outbreaks of avian influenza with disease-induced mortality led to changes in farmer behavior, with farmers more likely to harvest their broiler flocks and increase vaccination and disinfection practices. However, small-scale farmers, who make up the majority of poultry producers in low-income countries, tend to rely on rapid sale of birds to mitigate losses from diseases, potentially enhancing onward transmission of the virus. The study highlights the importance of understanding farmer responses to outbreaks of infectious diseases in livestock populations and the potential impact on disease transmission.
Researchers have identified two E3 ubiquitin ligases, RNF145 and gp78, as being responsible for HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR) turnover, a rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, which is targeted by statins. This research, carried out through CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide screening, helps to explain how the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) regulates HMGCR protein and transcriptional activity. Understanding HMGCR regulation is crucial, as it is considered central to cholesterol regulation and developing therapeutics for atherosclerosis-related diseases.
Mutations in the TREM2 gene have been linked to various neurodegenerative diseases. To understand how these mutations contribute to the diseases, the authors conducted structural and functional studies of wild-type and variant proteins. They found that the mutations associated with Nasu-Hakola disease affect protein stability and surface expression, while those linked to Alzheimer's affect binding to a TREM2 ligand. These mutations also map out a functional surface on TREM2. The findings suggest that therapies for neurodegenerative disorders targeting the TREM2 pathway should be personalized based on patient-specific genetic and functional differences.
A study has described an infection model of zebrafish with Trypanosoma carassii and detailed the swimming behaviour of trypanosomes in the blood and tissues of a vertebrate host. The transparency of zebrafish permitted high-resolution, real-time imaging of trypanosome movement and host-parasite interaction in vivo, under conditions that exactly represent the natural environment during infection. Trypanosomes can adapt their swimming behaviour to the heterogeneous host environments and can change direction through backwards swimming and through a ‘whip-like’ motion. The study expands our knowledge on trypanosome swimming behaviour and shows that trypanosomes can rapidly adapt to match the host environment. The study has used Trypanosoma carassii infection of transparent zebrafish with high-speed microscopy to provide the first description of trypanosome swimming behaviour in vivo in a vertebrate host.
Researchers have discovered the role that glutamate cotransmission plays in mediating components of a schizophrenia resilience phenotype. Dopamine neurons regulate behaviours relating to motivation, and are involved in neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia. DA neurons release multiple neurotransmitters, including glutamate. The study revealed that a reduction in dopamine neuron glutamate cotransmission appears to mediate a significant component of the GLS1 schizophrenia resilience phenotype, and glutamate cotransmission seems to be important for the attribution of motivational salience. The researchers found that dopamine neurons that can use both dopamine and glutamate as transmitters tend to express glutaminase gene Gls1. The study also found that genetic mutations that cause resilience have strong therapeutic value as they identify targets for therapy.
The SWI/SNF complex is a critical regulator of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells, and individual subunits have varied and specific roles during development and in diseases. The core subunit SMARCB1 is required for early embryonic survival and mutations can give rise to atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs) in the pediatric central nervous system. SMARCB1 represses bivalent genes in hESCs and antagonizes chromatin accessibility at super-enhancers. SMARCB1 is essential for neural induction but dispensable for mesodermal or endodermal differentiation. Mechanistically, SMARCB1 is essential for hESC super-enhancer silencing in neural differentiation conditions.
The document discusses the use of transcriptomics to identify biomarkers for vaccine-induced inflammation in order to assess vaccine safety. The study compares four licensed vaccines and three Toll-like receptor agonists in mice to identify differences in transcriptomic profiles of an acceptable immune response and an inflammatory reaction. The study reveals a set of novel biomarkers that are indicative of inflammation after vaccination and can be measured in the peripheral blood. The study also utilizes Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) to identify transcriptional patterns associated with each vaccine or TLR agonist. The study has developed an interactive web interface to facilitate data access and further discovery.
Researchers have discovered a subtle difference between humans and chimpanzees that may contribute to higher cognitive capacity in humans. A study of cerebral organoids from both species concluded that while cytoarchitecture, cell type and neurogenic gene expression were similar, the length between prometaphase-metaphase in mitotic apical progenitors that took place before neural stem cell division was longer in humans than chimps. The researchers suggest that a longer mitosis phase in humans reflects increased proliferative capacity and could indicate a significant regulatory change during human brain evolution.
A study has used cryo-electron microscopy to interpret the structure of Chikungunya virus-like particles. The findings suggest that MAb CHK-152 neutralizes infectivity by inhibiting fusion, while other MAbs neutralize by blocking attachment. Chikungunya virus is a mosquito-transmitted viral pathogen that causes fever, myalgia, rash and severe arthritis in humans. It was also found that prior to the 2005 epidemic on Réunion Island, CHIKV was not regarded as a highly prevalent virus. Currently, there is no vaccine or antiviral agent approved for use in humans.
Researchers have developed a new method to study how transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) interacts with human brains at the level of neurons and circuitries. TMS is a non-invasive method that stimulates brain function and can be used to induce plasticity. However, current TMS methods do not provide direct in vivo electrophysiological access to TMS-induced neuronal activity due to large TMS-induced electromagnetic fields. The new method allows for direct electrophysiological access to TMS-induced neuronal activity in real time, and enables the study of TMS-evoked activity of individual neurons. The researchers used laboratory rodents to provide an insight into the workings of neuron activity in response to TMS. They also built a TMS-EEP amplifier, and used an electrical shield for the TMS coil to overcome previously encountered obstacles in studying the neurophysiology of TMS. The researchers suggest that their new method could greatly improve the understanding of TMS-brain interactions, which could in turn lead to optimized TMS applications for exploration and treatment of the human brain.
Researchers have developed a new model which explains how theta sequences in the brain’s hippocampus are generated. Previous research has shown that during movement, the hippocampus forms a neuronal substrate for episodic and spatial memory by organising spike sequences within theta cycles. The new model developed by the researchers accounts for theta sequences using a novel model constrained by the septo-hippocampal circuitry. The new model has significant implications for future neuroscience research as it provides a method for studying how the brain compresses ongoing experiences into fast neural activity patterns suitable for fast decision making.
New research shows that human brains have environment-specific neural codes in the hippocampus, which is thought to play an important role in memory. The study found that the collection of active place cells in an environment serves to provide a "cognitive map" which assists with navigation and memory generally. This process, known as "remapping", is a form of reorganisation of hippocampal "maps" for different environments and is thought to be a fundamental mechanism for navigation and memory. The research suggests that pattern separation/completion mechanisms play an important role in how we successfully retrieve memories, and that a definitive neural link between behavioural interference, neural pattern separation, and spatial remapping is necessary to resolve this debate, and clarify the function of the hippocampus in memory.
Regeneration responses in animals are widespread, but the molecular players that confer regenerative capacities to non-regenerative species are not well understood. Researchers have found that in contrast to zebrafish, medaka Müller glia (olMG) cells behave like progenitors and have a restricted capacity to regenerate the retina, only restoring photoreceptors. Sox2 is a molecule that has been frequently used in reprogramming studies, and it has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for maintaining the MG proliferation associated with regeneration in zebrafish. The researchers found that inducing targeted expression of sox2 in olMG cells can shift their behavior into a regenerative mode reminiscent of zebrafish, where they self-renew and regenerate multiple retinal cell types. They also observed that olMG cells respond preferentially to injuries of photoreceptor cells and fail to migrate basally toward retinal ganglion cell (RGC) injuries.
Joubert syndrome is a rare condition that affects the developing brain, resulting in specific malformations that can be detected by MRI scans. Researchers have identified a novel genetic mutation that causes Joubert syndrome, which disrupts the function of cilia, hair-like structures that play a crucial role in cell signalling. The mutation, which has previously been identified in some healthy individuals, was found in three families with Joubert syndrome, suggesting that other genetic factors are also involved in the development of the syndrome. Symptoms of Joubert syndrome include delayed motor skills, psychomotor delay, scoliosis, distinct facial characteristics, recurrent febrile seizures, and respiratory problems. The study highlights the importance of cilia in brain development and suggests that ciliopathies may, in part, result from defects in cell polarity.
A study has discovered 57 epistatic interactions that replicated in a smaller dataset, explaining on average 4.3% of phenotypic variance. The study identified a candidate set of 508 variance associated SNPs using RNA-sequence data from lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the TwinsUK cohort. This allows researchers to identify both epistasis and gene by environment effects (GxE) through the identification of variance quantitative trait loci. The study found that GxE plays a role in approximately 70% of these associations. The study suggests that using molecular phenotypes in this way may provide a route to uncovering genetic interactions underlying more complex traits. The discrepancy between the contribution of known genetic factors to variation of a trait and the estimated total contribution of all genetic variants has become known as ‘missing heritability’.
The transition from juvenile to adult phase in plants is controlled by a variety of factors, including age, light, nutrients, and temperature. The decline in microRNA156 (miR156) with age promotes the expression of adult traits, but the regulation of miR156 abundance is not fully understood. Recent research shows that sugar represses miR156 expression both transcriptionally and through transcript degradation, triggering the juvenile-to-adult phase transition. The MIR156A and MIR156C loci have dominant roles in the miR156 family in Arabidopsis. The abundance of pri-MIR156A and pri-MIR156C oscillates with the highest level in the morning and lowest before dark, and the reduction of these transcripts by sugar triggers the decrease of miR156. Glucose sensors like HXK1 play an important role in regulating gene expression.
The article discusses the role of Nur77 in regulating bone resorption by osteoclasts. Osteoclasts are important for skeletal remodeling, but overactive osteoclasts can cause bone-degenerative disorders. NFATc1 is the master transcription factor of osteoclasts and its activation and amplification have been extensively studied. However, it is unclear how NFATc1 signaling is eventually resolved. The article uncovers a previously unrecognized mechanism in which NFATc1 exerts self-limitation via an NFATc1→Nur77→Cblb—•NFATc1 negative feedback loop. Nur77 is a key player in osteoprotection and a new therapeutic target for bone diseases. Lack of Nur77 leads to low bone mass owing to increased osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption. Bone density is tightly regulated by the bone-forming osteoblasts and the bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Nur77 suppression specifically enhanced osteoclastogenesis during bone remodeling. In bone marrow differentiation cultures from Nur77 knockout mice, osteoclast differentiation markers such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (Trap), cathepsin K (Ctsk), calcitonin receptor (Calcr), and carbonic anhydrase 2 (Car2), as well as Nfatc1 expression were higher than those from the wild type mice. The outcome was larger and more mature osteoclasts with higher resorptive activity. The expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic genes was comparable, indicating unaffected osteoclast apoptosis. In contrast, Nur77 suppression had no effect on osteoblast differentiation from Nur77 KO bone marrow mesenchymal progenitors. The skeletal phenotype of Nur77 KO mice revealed that Nur77 regulation of bone resorption is intrinsic to the hematopoetic lineage. The mechanism through which Nur77 regulates bone resorption and its regulation in different cell types requires further research.
The document describes the research on human γ-secretase, an enzyme responsible for cleaving different substrates, including the Notch receptor and amyloid precursor protein, which are implicated in cancer and Alzheimer's disease respectively. The research uses cryo-EM structures and image classification procedures to identify three distinct conformations in the sample and gain further insights into the proteolytic mechanism of γ-secretase. The study aims to understand how the enzyme cleaves its many substrates and develop modulators of its activity without global inhibition of the complex, which may affect other pathways. It also discusses the challenges of masked classification in dealing with structural variability in less interesting parts of the protein complex.
This study examines the role of empathy in promoting cooperation in societies. Social norms provide reputations to individuals based on past actions, which can promote cooperation assuming reputations are objective. However, opinions about an individual's reputation may differ across a population without a centralized institution providing objective evaluation. Empathy fosters cooperation by reducing unjustified defection. The norms of moral evaluation depend on high levels of empathy, while different norms maximize social welfare in populations incapable of empathy. Empathy can evolve through social contagion and is a key component for sustaining cooperation in societies.
The prolyl-3,4-dihydroxylase Ofd1 and nuclear import adaptor Nro1 regulate the hypoxic response in fission yeast by controlling activity of the sterol regulatory element-binding protein transcription factor Sre1. Rps23 is an enzyme substrate for Ofd1 and also a binding partner via a conserved Ofd1 binding sequence. Binding Rps23 prevents Ofd1 binding to Sre1N, allowing Sre1N to activate hypoxic gene expression. Nro1 imports Rps23 into the nucleus for assembly into 40S ribosomes. Low oxygen inhibits Ofd1 hydroxylase activity and stabilizes the Ofd1-Rps23-Nro1 complex, thereby sequestering Ofd1 from binding Sre1. To date, oxygen is the only known signal to Sre1.
The document describes the structure of cytotoxic alpha-synuclein fibrils, which are a major component of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in Parkinson's disease. The structure was determined by cryo-electron microscopy, and it was found that the fibrils are composed of two protofilaments with a hydrophobic core and two hydrophilic regions. The fibrils are polar and interact at the fibril core via a hydrophobic steric zipper-geometry comprised of beta-strand beta3. The structure may have implications for the design of molecules for the diagnosis and treatment of synucleinopathies.
Researchers have developed the first functional 3D model of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), a common pathological feature in Alzheimer's disease. The model uses biomimetic tissue engineering to investigate the role of lipoproteins in Aβ metabolism in cerebral vessels, with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol showing promise in reducing risk. Combining anteluminal infusion of apolipoprotein E and circulating high-density lipoprotein shows the most effective Aβ clearance, with apoE4 found to be less effective than apoE2.
The nuclear protein RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 (RCD1) integrates organellar signaling from both chloroplasts and mitochondria to establish transcriptional control over metabolic processes in both organelles. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a role in plant organellar signaling from both chloroplasts and mitochondria, as supersede anion radical is formed in the organelles by electron transfer from electron transfer chains to molecular oxygen. Chloroplastic ROS production increases with the application of methyl viologen. RCD1 is a molecular component that integrates organellar signal input from both chloroplasts and mitochondria to exert its influence on nuclear gene expression. Pre-treatment with methyl viologen in darkness resulted in increased tolerance of rcd1 to chloroplastic ROS production. The abundance, redox status, and oligomerization state of the nuclear-localized RCD1 protein changed in response to ROS generated in the chloroplasts. Thiol redox enzymes regulated by RCD1 were discovered through analysis of chloroplast proteins related to photosynthesis and ROS scavenging. RCD1 is involved in the regulation of the redox status of chloroplastic thiol enzymes, suggesting a mechanism of action that is independent of the photosynthetic electron transport chain but is associated with changed thiol redox state of chloroplast enzymes.
The study investigates the functional consequences of long-term synaptic plasticity in the pre and postsynaptic regions, and suggests that spike-timing-dependent plasticity with the combined expression of pre- and postsynaptic plasticity leads to receptive fields with reduced variability and better discriminability compared to postsynaptic plasticity alone. The study further shows that long-term modifications in receptive field statistics match recent sensory perception experiments. The study establishes that while layer-5 pyramidal to pyramidal cell synapses exhibit timing-dependent LTD presynaptically, LTP is driven by postsynaptic coincidence detection. The functional consequences of these findings are also discussed.
Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) are enzymes that play a crucial role in DNA metabolism, and their activity is regulated by allosteric mechanisms. The activity master-switch in RNRs, the ATP-cone, has been found exclusively in the catalytic subunit, but in two RNR subclasses in which the catalytic subunit lacks the ATP-cone, the ATP-cone has been found in the radical-generating subunit. The specific example studied is in the Leeuwenhoekiella blandensis radical-generating subunit, where the ATP-cone regulates activity via quaternary structure. The lack of an ATP-cone domain in the catalytic subunit is compensated by the transfer of the domain to the radical-generating subunit, representing the first observation of transfer of an allosteric domain between components of the same enzyme complex. Allosteric regulation of an enzyme is defined as regulation of activity by binding of an effector molecule to a different location of the enzyme than the active site. The effector influences the distribution of tertiary or quaternary conformations of an enzyme, alone or in combination, modulating its activity. The study provides a potential route to regulate engineered enzymes by dATP-inhibition for enzymes in which activity is affected by oligomerization.
Microscopic wetness in the form of thin films and micrometer-sized droplets can persist on plant leaves during the day due to the absorption of water until dissolution of hygroscopic aerosols. This film is essential to bacterial cell survival on plant leaves during the dry daytime. Stable microdroplets form around bacterial aggregates due to capillary pinning and deliquescence, and cell survival is higher the larger the droplet. Microdroplet formation around aggregates is likely key to bacterial survival in microbial habitats, including leaf surfaces. Bacterial cells on leaf surfaces are observed in solitary and aggregated forms, and the majority of cells are typically found within surface-attached aggregates, which help protect them from desiccation. A simple experimental system that creates deliquescent microscopic wetness on artificial surfaces has enabled the study of the interplay between bacterial surface colonization, cell survival, and microscopic wetness. This system enables capturing microscopic leaf wetness central properties, including contribution of deliquescent substrates, droplet persistence, thickness, and patchiness. Droplet size affects cell survival, and survival was nearly exclusively restricted to large droplets for both strains of bacteria studied.
The document discusses a study on endoderm specification during embryonic development using mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC). The study uncovers a mechanism for PI3K signaling that is required for endoderm specification and found that PI3K promotes commitment through an atypical activity that delimited epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Akt1 transduced this activity via modifications to the extracellular matrix (ECM), and appropriate ECM could itself induce anterior endodermal identity. PI3K/Akt1-modified ECM contained low levels of Fibronectin (Fn1), and Fn1 dose was key to specifying anterior endodermal identity. The study also explains the normal development of endoderm progenitors and how the study used ESC differentiation to monitor endoderm specification from ESCs. Inhibition of different MAPKs inhibited mesendodermal and pan-endodermal populations, but only PI3K inhibition specifically affected the induction of anterior definitive endoderm. PI3K is required after primitive streak (PS) stages for the acquisition of anterior positional identity in the endoderm, and when it is suppressed, cells acquire an earlier more naïve or potentially posterior endodermal state.
Caprin-2 is a protein that plays a role in the binding and regulation of antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) mRNA transcripts in the hypothalamus. In response to osmotic stress, Caprin-2 increases in abundance and binds to AVP mRNA transcripts, increasing the length of their 3' poly(A) tails, which aids in translation and stability. Knockdown of Caprin-2 in the hypothalamus leads to decreased urine output and fluid intake, and increased urine osmolality, urine sodium concentration, and plasma AVP levels, indicating a crucial role in maintaining salt and water homeostasis.
A study has found that witnessing someone else's pain activates the same areas of the brain that respond when we are in pain ourselves. This activity can influence prosocial behaviour, such as donating money to alleviate the other person's pain. The study used electroencephalography (EEG), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and high-definition transcranial direct current stimulation (HD-tDCS) to explore how altered somatosensory activity contributed to prosocial decision-making. Results showed that altering somatosensory activity interfered with pain-donation coupling only when pain was expressed by the hand. The study suggests that vicarious somatosensory activations contribute to prosocial behaviour by helping to transform observed reactions of affected body parts into accurate perceptions of pain necessary for decision-making. The role of empathy in motivating prosocial behaviour is debated, but the study provides evidence that mapping the pain of others onto our own pain representations can motivate prosocial behaviour.
Researchers have used multisite recordings of neuronal activity in unanesthetized rats to investigate the neural basis of bladder control during urination. The study focused on a circuit that communicates bladder information to the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) through spinal-projecting pontine micturition center (PMC) neurons and the locus coeruleus (LC). They found that LC neuronal activity consistently increased 10-30 seconds before micturition, while PMC neurons discharged during micturition until bladder pressure decreased. A theta oscillation developed in the LC, the mPFC desynchronized, and LC-mPFC coherence increased during the pre-micturition interval. The time lag between the shift in LC-mPFC network activity and micturition may allow for disengagement from ongoing behaviors unrelated to micturition and the initiation of specific voiding behaviors to occur in socially appropriate and environmentally safe conditions. Dysfunction between voiding behaviors and micturition characterizes conditions such as enuresis.
The article describes a study that identifies the role of Ovaries Absent (Ova) in linking the chromosomal protein Heterochromatin Protein 1 (HP1) to H3K4 demethylation during gene silencing, which is required for ovary development, transposon silencing, and heterochromatin formation. The study was conducted using a female fertility screen in Drosophila and identified that ova functions in the stem cell niche, downstream of Piwi, to support germline stem cell differentiation. It also acts as a suppressor of position effect variegation, and is required for silencing telomeric transposons in the germline by linking the H3K4 demethylase dLsd1 to HP1a for local histone modifications. The results suggest that Ova, HP1a and dLsd1 function in a shared pathway in escort cells to establish a repressive chromatin state for the dpp gene locus. Finally, the study also suggests that removing one functional copy of ova is sufficient to cause fully-pigmented eyes in In (l)wm4h background, which is a result of chromosomal position effect variegation.
Asthma is a complex condition with diverse causes and presentations. Researchers in the UK have used unsupervised model-based cluster analysis to identify groups at high risk of asthma by assessing deep immunological and respiratory phenotyping. They discovered three distinct trajectories, only one of which was a high-risk ‘atopic’ cluster with increased propensity for allergic diseases throughout childhood. This duality of atopic and non-atopic risk factors for wheeze in the low-risk group was further supported by decision tree analysis. The findings demonstrate the utility of unsupervised analysis in elucidating heterogeneity in asthma pathogenesis and provide a foundation for improving management and prevention of childhood asthma.
A mouse mutant with accelerated aging in its retina and pathologies seen in age-dependent retinal diseases was identified in a study seeking to understand the molecular basis of aging. A mutation in the transmembrane 135 (Tmem135) was responsible for these phenotypes, which indicated that Tmem135 is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics. The results suggest that the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics through Tmem135 is critical for controlling the progression of retinal aging and for protection from environmental stress. The study identified Tmem135 as a critical link between aging and age-dependent diseases, and the mutant mice provide a useful experimental system for studying the molecular mechanisms underlying the aging process and how they relate to disease-causing mechanisms in humans.
The document describes a new tool called ABAleons that has been developed to monitor the concentration of Abscisic acid (ABA) in living plants. ABA is a hormone that plays a critical role in plant development and stress response, particularly in response to limited water supply. ABAleons uses an optogenetic approach to produce a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) signal in response to ABA concentration changes. This enables visualization of ABA concentration differences in various tissues with high spatial and temporal resolution. The paper discusses the design and engineering of ABAleons, its application in monitoring ABA transportation from the hypocotyl to the shoot and root, and how it can partially repress Arabidopsis ABA responses when expressed at high levels. The paper concludes by discussing the potential of the ABAleons tool for further research into hormone distribution and transport.
The RIG-I immune sensor recognizes 5' tri- or diphosphate containing viral double-stranded (ds) RNA, distinguishing it from self-RNA, through ATP hydrolysis by RIG-I's RNA translocase domain. Mutations in ATPase motifs can lead to the multi-system disorder Singleton-Merten Syndrome (SMS) and increased interferon levels, indicating misregulated signaling by RIG-I. SMS mutations phenocopy a mutation that allows ATP binding but prevents hydrolysis, constitutively signaling through endogenous RNA and co-purifying with self-RNA even from virus-infected cells. Biochemical studies and cryo-electron microscopy identify a 60S ribosomal expansion segment as a dominant self-RNA that is stably bound by ATPase deficient RIG-I. ATP hydrolysis displaces wild-type RIG-I from this self-RNA but not from 5' triphosphate dsRNA. The study suggests that ATP hydrolysis prevents recognition of self-RNA, and SMS mutations lead to unintentional signaling through prolonged RNA binding.
Drug addicts are prone to relapse when exposed to cues associated with drug use. Preclinical studies of animal models have focused on the role of conditioned stimuli (CSs) that signal drug delivery, but little is known about the effects of discriminative stimuli (DSs) that exert stimulus control over drug-seeking behavior. In this study, rats were trained to self-administer cocaine under DS control, and the incubation of drug seeking was investigated in the absence of drug-paired CSs. DS-controlled cocaine seeking was found to incubate over 60 days of abstinence and persist up to 300 days, suggesting that DSs may be relevant to relapse prevention. DS-controlled drug seeking was specific to cocaine and was observed in the absence of explicit drug-paired CSs. These findings extend previous studies of DS-controlled drug seeking and highlight the potential role of DSs in stimulus control of drug relapse. The study has implications for the development of treatments to prevent drug relapse.
A recent study on Lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) and LCAT-activating compounds have revealed a potent piperidinylpyrazolopyridine activator as an ideal treatment for coronary heart disease (CHD) and familial LCAT deficiency (FLD). The crystal structure of human LCAT in combination with the activator and an acyl intermediate-like inhibitor has been reported which shows LCAT in an active conformation. This activator differs from other LCAT activators as it binds exclusively to the membrane-binding domain rather than HDL. The compound also stabilizes residues in the MBD and facilitates channeling of substrates into the active site, indicating that compounds targeting the MBD have therapeutic potential. The study provides a better understanding of the substrate binding site of LCAT and a rational framework for the development of LCAT agonists and improved biotherapeutics for enhancing or restoring reverse cholesterol transport in CHD and FLD patients.
Primary Ovarian Insufficiency (POI) affects approximately 1% of women under the age of 40 and is often diagnosed too late, leading to infertility and significant morbidity and mortality. Exome sequencing of two Finnish sisters with POI revealed a homozygous mutation in the FANCM gene, which is involved in the DNA damage response and breast cancer. The study found that the mutation may cause meiotic defects leading to a depleted follicular stock, and the patients’ lymphocytes displayed higher levels of chromosomal abnormalities. Our findings document the first Mendelian phenotype due to a biallelic FANCM mutation. There is a link between POI and other breast cancer genes, such as BRCA1, and a few apparently healthy individuals homozygous for the FANCM mutation have been identified.
This study looks at the precision of changes in synaptic strength and how much information can be stored at a single synapse. The researchers use a complete 3D reconstruction of hippocampal neuropil to measure various metrics of dendritic spine morphology, including spine head volume, PSD area, and neck diameter. They find that pairs of spines on the same dendrite and receiving input from the same axon have highly correlated metrics, suggesting that synaptic strengths on these spines are adjusted with high precision. The observed precision requires averaging activity over several minutes due to the stochastic variability of synaptic activation. Understanding the degree of precision in the adjustment of synaptic strengths is important for understanding how we remember facts about the world.
The motor neurons in the crustacean cardiac ganglion generate synchronized output despite using distinct conductance values, making them vulnerable to disruptions in synchronized output. The authors hypothesized that robustness is accomplished via plasticity and blocking high-threshold K+ conductances in the motor neurons helps resynchronize the network and restore excitability. The variability in conductances may result from compensatory changes required to maintain reliable output over time. Variability in conductances, such as in the LCs, makes the network vulnerable to desynchronization as a result of TEA exposure, but compensatory mechanisms can restore synchrony. The authors developed a biophysical computational model of the entire cardiac network and discovered cooperative homeostatic plasticity among intrinsic conductances and electrical coupling across multiple cells in the cardiac network, contributing to the overall robustness of CPG output.
Scientists have used a new imaging method called stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM) to study the structure of proteins within the kidney glomerular basement membrane (GBM). The GBM is a mediator of glomerular ultrafiltration and is composed of extracellular matrix proteins, which play a key role in human disease. Using STORM, the scientists analysed domains near the ends of agrin, laminin and collagen IV in human GBM and found a highly organised molecular structure. The scientists also discovered disruptions in this GBM architecture in a mouse model of Alport syndrome, a hereditary disease of the GBM caused by collagen IV mutations.
Researchers have developed a new approach called continuous, cell-by-cell morpho-rheological (MORE) analysis that can identify and characterise pathological changes in blood cells in several disease conditions, without the need for labelling, enrichment or separation, and at rates of 1000 cells per second. The technique provides a functional dimension to conventional blood analysis, allowing for the promotion and diagnosis of hematological and systemic disorders by creating a new MORE complete blood count. MORE analysis can sensitively detect morphological and rheological changes of various blood cells from individual drop of blood. Currently undergoing further testing, MORE analysis could provide clinicians with a quick and effective tool for initial screening of various diseases, including spherocytosis, malaria infection and viral and bacterial infections.
Dopamine, a positive reinforcement signal, can retroactively convert hippocampal timing-dependent synaptic depression into potentiation. This effect requires functional NMDA receptors and is mediated in part through the activation of the cAMP/PKA cascade. The study supports the idea that reward-related signaling can act on a pre-established synaptic eligibility trace, thereby associating specific experiences with behaviorally distant, rewarding outcomes. This finding identifies a biologically plausible mechanism for solving the 'distal reward problem'. Dopamine has a modulatory action on spike timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), which is profoundly influenced by neuromodulators. DA has been found to widen the time window for the induction of t-LTP. The reinforcing signal of dopamine can strengthen active synapses even when it arrives after the activity. DA retroactively converts t-LTD into t-LTP. The specificity of this DAergic conversion of STDP is assessed using DAR antagonists. The specific DAR activation is responsible for the conversion of t-LTD into t-LTP. Delayed application of DA failed to convert t-LTD into t-LTP. Dopamine-induced conversion of t-LTD into t-LTP depends on the timing of DA application.
This study investigates the role of Kirrel3 in regulating synapse formation at hippocampal mossy fiber (MF) synapses, which connect dentate granule (DG) neurons to both CA3 and GABAergic neurons. The authors show that Kirrel3 is required for formation of DG-GABA MF filopodia, the structures that give rise to DG-GABA synapses and that regulate feed-forward inhibition of CA3 neurons. Kirrel3 was shown to selectively regulate excitatory drive to CA3 neurons after DG stimulation. Loss of Kirrel3 results in increased CA3 neuron activity in developing mice. Alterations in the Kirrel3 gene are repeatedly associated with intellectual disabilities, but the role of Kirrel3 at synapses remained largely unknown. This study provides insight into understanding the cellular basis of Kirrel3-dependent neurodevelopmental disorders.
Researchers have discovered that the way transcription factors (TFs) move within the cell nucleus is guided by nuclear architecture, rather than purely by how fast they can move. This insight into 'diffusive mobilities' has far-reaching implications for understanding the dynamics of transcriptional activity and regulation, which depend on the ways in which these TFs actively explore their nuclear environment. To investigate, the scientists created a single-molecule tracking assay using sptPALM to determine TFs dynamics, and found that the proto-oncogene c-Myc is a global explorer of the nucleus, while the positive transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb) is a local explorer 'oversampling’ its environment. The scientists suggest that the exploration geometry of TFs is not only restrained by their interactions with nuclear structures, but ultimately controls their kinetics when searching for targets. 
This article discusses how flies use olfactory information to adjust their locomotion. By using Drosophila as a model system, researchers examined the logic by which odors affect behavior. A novel behavioral arena was designed to examine a fly's locomotion under precise stimulus conditions. The results showed that odors have a diverse effect on locomotion and can modulate many motor parameters. The study also found that a single ORN class can strongly affect some motor parameters without affecting others. The study suggests that each ORN class affects a subset of motor parameters, and each motor parameter is affected by a subset of ORN classes. Overall, the data support a modular organization for odor-guided locomotion.
Spermatogenesis, the process of generating sperm from stem cells, is critical for male fertility. The exact mechanisms of how immotile sperm are transported through the seminiferous tubules of the testes remain poorly understood. However, recent research has shown that coordinated contractions of smooth muscle-like testicular peritubular cells propel immotile sperm to the rete testis by providing the propulsive force for luminal sperm transport. Researchers have identified P2 receptor-dependent purinergic signaling pathways as physiological triggers of tubular contractions, and extracellular ATP has been shown to trigger robust Ca2+ signals in peritubular cells, resulting in contractile motion of the seminiferous tubule. The research suggests that paracrine purinergic signaling coordinates peristaltic recurrent contractions of the seminiferous tubules to transport immotile sperm to the rete testis.
Scientists have identified a protein called CENP-M that is crucial for the assembly and stability of the HIKM complex, which is responsible for the successful assembly of kinetochores in cells to ensure the faithful delivery of chromosomes during cell division. The precise configuration and function of the kinetochore-centromere interface is currently poorly understood, so this discovery represents a significant step in understanding the molecular mechanisms behind chromosome segregation and mitotic progression. Failure to properly align chromosomes during cell division can lead to genetic abnormalities such as cancer
SAAs are a family of proteins that are induced during infection, but their exact function remained unclear. Researchers have now discovered that SAAs are retinol binding proteins that circulate during microbial challenges and can facilitate the transport of retinol. Retinol is important in immune responses and the team found that SAAs limited the bacterial burden in tissues after acute infection. Mouse and human SAAs bound retinol with nanomolar affinity, were associated with retinol in vivo, and the researchers determined the crystal structure of mouse SAA3 which has a hydrophobic binding pocket that can accommodate retinol. The findings reveal new information about the role of SAAs and provide insight into how retinol is circulated during infection.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular response to maintain homeostasis when misfolded proteins accumulate within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). It involves the detection of misfolded proteins by UPR sensor proteins, but the precise mechanism remains unclear. This study identifies a noncanonical interaction between the ATPase domain of the ER chaperone BiP and the luminal domains of UPR sensors Ire1 and Perk, implicating BiP as the key component for detecting ER stress and suggesting an allosteric mechanism for UPR induction. The interaction between BiP and UPR sensors was unaffected by nucleotides, and BiP was found to be a dual functional UPR sensor, sensing unfolded proteins by canonical binding to substrates and transducing this event to noncanonical, signaling interaction to Ire1 and Perk. These findings suggest that BiP plays an important role in mammalian ER stress sensing. Additionally, unfolded peptide substrates were found to have an effect on the BiP-luminal domain complexes, indicating a potential signaling function in UPR activation.
Researchers have found that the protein Set1, which typically methylates histones associated with transcriptional activation, can act as a repressor of gene expression in yeasts. The team discovered that Set1 can be recruited to heterochromatic regions of the genome by the Atf1 transcription factor and works with a histone deacetylase enzyme to promote gene repression. These findings suggest that histone methyltransferases may have more varied roles in genome regulation than previously thought.
A genome-wide association study of Drosophila melanogaster has revealed that the probability of death following Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated with genetic differences that affect intestinal barrier dysfunction. TBI is a major cause of death and disability worldwide. Results indicate that mortality from brain injury is dependent on genetic and environmental effects on intestinal barrier permeability. The study found that ingestion of glucose after a primary injury increases the probability of death through a secondary injury mechanism that exacerbates intestinal barrier dysfunction. The study also found that the innate immune response is activated shortly after primary injuries. Furthermore, variation in the MI24 could be due to many genes or environmental factors, given that the probability of death following traumatic injury is a quantitative trait affected by many genes.
A study on cross-fostered mice has identified genetic variations that indirectly modify maternal behavior and offspring development. The study found specific loci on chromosomes 5 and 7 that modify maternal behavior, and genetic variation among mothers that influences offspring development, independent of offspring genotype. Offspring solicitation and maternal behavior were found to be coadapted and negatively correlated between mothers and their biological offspring. The study shows that parental provisioning and offspring solicitation are unique to specific genotypes and that solicitation is costly. The study was conducted using the BXD mouse population, which captures a large amount of naturally occurring genetic variation.
This article discusses how codon usage in trypanosomes affects mRNA levels post-transcriptionally. A new codon usage metric, the gene expression codon adaptation index (geCAI), was developed to predict mRNA levels based on codon usage. The method was tested using GFP transgenes with different codon usage and found to be successful over a 25-fold range, similar to endogenous mRNAs. The study also found that translation was necessary for accelerated mRNA turnover resulting from codon usage. The study suggests that, in trypanosomes, the information determining most mRNA levels resides in the open reading frame, and translation is required to access this information. The study also discusses polycistronic transcription in trypanosomes and the regulation of mRNA abundance at several levels during its production/degradation cycle. The study concludes by suggesting that codon use is central to the regulation of mRNA levels in trypanosomes, and a better understanding of this mechanism could lead to the development of new treatments for diseases caused by these parasites.
The plasticity of genetic interaction networks over time or in response to external stresses is an important feature of cellular pathways, but methodological frameworks to investigate this are largely lacking. In this study, researchers have performed a combinatorial RNAi screen in Drosophila cells at multiple time points and after pharmacological inhibition of Ras signaling activity to analyze the plasticity of genetic interactions. They identified an algorithm called MODIFI to analyze how genetic interactions rewire over time and discovered more statistically significant interactions compared to end-point assays. They also observed several examples of context-dependent crosstalk between signaling pathways such as an interaction between Ras and Rel which is dependent on MEK activity. The study helps to better understand the principles of interaction changes in higher order combinations of genetic perturbations.
The article discusses inter-individual variation in infection outcomes, wherein two individuals exposed to the same infection may have different outcomes. A model is developed using genetically identical Drosophila that are given identical systemic infections, but experience different outcomes. Differences in bacterial burden at the time of death do not explain the two outcomes, rather, inter-individual variation in survival stems from variation in within-host bacterial growth, which is determined by the immune response. A theoretical model is developed that describes the probabilistic nature of bacterial growth and thus host survival based on three key factors: the net rate of bacterial proliferation, the timing of effective immunological control, and a threshold pathogen density that must be reached to enable the bacteria to switch to a lethal acute infection rather than a chronically persistent one. BLUD, a novel measure of bacterial pathogenicity or toxicity to the host is proposed. The BLUD represents a measure of host disease tolerance corresponding to the maximal bacterial load that can be sustained before the individual dies from the infection. The BLUD varies among hosts and depends on the pathogens, but not on the initial inoculum starting the infection.
Researchers describe the suitability of synthetic target site drives and split drives as flexible safeguarding strategies for gene drive experiments. They experimentally demonstrate that these strategies can serve as appropriate molecular safeguards in the development and testing of CRISPR homing gene drives. The researchers designed and tested three synthetic target site drives and a split drive system in Drosophila melanogaster and found that their behavior closely resembles that of standard homing drives, with similar rates of drive conversion efficiency and resistance allele formation. They suggest that these strategies can help prevent the unintended spread of gene drives from laboratories into natural populations.
The document discusses the role of premotor neurons in controlling movement across and between joints, and the use of modified rabies virus tracing to investigate these circuits in mice. The study finds that premotor neurons diverge to both synergist and antagonist motor pools throughout the spinal cord, and that there are spinal neurons mediating co-contraction of antagonist muscles. Long descending propriospinal neurons (LDPNs) are also identified in the cervical spinal cord, which project to both lumbar and cervical MNs and could provide a substrate for coordination between distant joints. Overall, the study suggests that the spinal cord contains premotor INs that project to multiple motor pools, including antagonists, and could form substrates for the fundamental syllables of movement.
A study has shown that the openness or closedness of a visual pigment's chromophore-binding pocket may be an indicator of whether the pigment is intended for detecting dim or bright light. Rod pigments have a low rate of spontaneous activation in darkness, meaning they offer a good signal-to-noise ratio for dim-light vision. Cone pigments, on the other hand, may generally be 25 times more spontaneously active than rod pigments, possibly because they have an 'open' chromophore-binding pocket, defined by the capability of chromophore-exchange in darkness. The study involved developing a physicochemical theory that predicts the rate of spontaneous activity of representative rod and cone pigments from their peak-absorption wavelength. Mice were used to test the theory, with a mutant pigment, E122Q-rhodopsin, tested for its noise. Pigment noise could be linked to a pigment's lambda max, with pigments having longer lambda max being noisier. The study was carried out in accordance with procedures approved by institutional animal use and care committees.
Researchers have identified how cytoplasmic dynein, a motor protein that powers intracellular movement of cargo towards the minus end of microtubules, is targeted to the plus end. This targeting is identified as "crucial for proper dynein function" in a number of organisms, but the molecular mechanism underlying this targeting had hitherto remained unclear. Researchers reconstituted dynein plus-end transport, and used single-molecule microscopy to examine the mechanism, finding two proteins were sufficient to couple dynein to Kip2, a plus-end-directed kinesin.
The interaction between microtubules and integrin-based adhesions is important for cell polarity and migration, and the mechanism linking the two is unknown. A recent study shows that cortical microtubule stabilization sites containing specific proteins are recruited to focal adhesions by the adaptor protein KANK1, which directly interacts with the major adhesion component talin. Perturbation of this interaction disrupts the association between microtubule-stabilizing complexes and focal adhesions, suggesting that KANK1 links the two macromolecules that control cortical attachment of actin fibers and microtubules. The organization of cortical microtubule stabilization complexes at the cell cortex may be controlled by interactions with tension-sensitive components of focal adhesions. Results indicate that the two distinct cortical assemblies, focal adhesions and cortical microtubule stabilization complexes, responsible for the attachment of actin and microtubules, respectively, are co-organized by KANK1 molecules. The mechanism underlying their specific targeting to integrin adhesion sites remains elusive.
In non-mammalian vertebrates, vestibular hair cells (HCs) undergo cell death and replacement (turnover) throughout life. There is no definitive evidence that this process occurs in mammals, but a new study has found that utricular type II vestibular hair cells undergo turnover in adult mice under normal conditions. Supporting cells phagocytose both type I and II hair cells and replace type II hair cells. Type I hair cells are not restored. Destruction of hair cells causes supporting cells to generate six times as many type II hair cells compared to normal conditions. The findings expand the understanding of sensorineural plasticity in adult vestibular organs and further elucidate the roles that supporting cells serve during homeostasis and after injury.
The process of chromatin assembly involves ATP-dependent motor proteins and histone chaperones. Chromatin remodeling-defective Chd1 motor proteins are able to catalyze ATP-dependent chromatin assembly to form randomly-distributed nucleosomes that are not spaced in periodic arrays. Wild-type Chd1, however, can convert randomly-distributed nucleosomes into periodic arrays. ATP-dependent nucleosome assembly and chromatin remodeling are functionally distinct processes, and the findings suggest that nucleosomes are first formed randomly and then regularly spaced nucleosome arrays are generated by chromatin remodeling activity. The ATP-dependent motor proteins involved in chromatin assembly and remodeling include Chd1, ATRX, and ISWI-containing complexes. The efficiency of chromatin assembly requires both a histone chaperone and a motor protein. Chromatin remodeling-defective Chd1 proteins can assemble nucleosomes in an ATP-dependent manner, but are unable to generate evenly-spaced nucleosome arrays during chromatin assembly.
The paper discusses the function of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in the defense against bacterial and fungal pathogens in Drosophila. AMPs are cationic peptides that play a role in innate immunity in animals and plants. AMPs have been previously shown to kill bacteria and fungi at physiological concentrations in vitro, but little validation has been done in vivo. The authors utilized CRISPR gene editing to delete most known immune-inducible AMPs of Drosophila and characterized the in vivo function of individual and groups of AMPs against diverse bacterial and fungal pathogens. The results showed that Drosophila AMPs act primarily against Gram-negative bacteria and fungi, contributing either additively or synergistically. The study highlights key interactions among immune effectors and pathogens and how these defense peptides act either alone or together.
Researchers have discovered that Thermoproteus tenax, a species lacking canonical SRP RNA genes, instead has a permuted SRP RNA gene. This gene's 5' and 3' termini are located near an important loop for SRP RNA functionality, and are ligated to form circular SRP RNA molecules that can still bind to the SRP19 and SRP54 proteins. The circularization site is processed by tRNA splicing endonuclease, a moonlighting activity of the machinery. The circular RNA molecules created are stable and functional. The study also sets out the methods used to prepare and test the molecules.
The article describes how Histone Deacetylase 7 (HDAC7) controls the thymic effector programming of Natural Killer T (NKT) cells and how interference with this function contributes to tissue-specific autoimmunity. The article highlights the role of HDAC7 in the regulation of the innate effector programming of NKT cells by direct modulation of the transcriptional activity of Promyelocytic Leukemia Zinc Finger Protein (PLZF). Alterations in HDAC7 function result in aberrant effector programming of T cells in both the Tconv and innate-like lineages, leading to multiple abnormalities in peripheral populations. The article offers new insights into the molecular pathways that regulate the effector programming of innate-like T cells and sets forth a novel cellular model of tissue-specific autoimmunity.
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) is an enzyme that converts ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides, essential for DNA biosynthesis and repair. RNR uses multiple allosteric mechanisms to maintain the balanced deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) pools required for accurate DNA replication. The binding of (d)NTP effectors to an allosteric specificity site in RNR influences the preference of RNR for its four nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) substrates.  The binding of effector dATP alters the active site to select for pyrimidines over purines, whereas effectors dGTP and TTP select for substrates ADP and GDP, respectively. This work determines the structures of Escherichia coli class Ia RNR with all four substrate/specificity effector-pairs to reveal the conformational rearrangements responsible for this remarkable allostery.
The glycosyltransferase EOGT adds the sugar O-GlcNAc to epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) repeats on Notch receptors,
The article discusses the function of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter, a channel complex that regulates cell survival and ATP production by allowing calcium to enter the mitochondria. The authors conducted experiments using whole-mitoplast voltage-clamping, a technique that allows for precise control of the voltage and concentration gradient, to definitively identify the pore-forming subunit of the uniporter channel as the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) gene. They also found that a single point mutation in the putative pore domain of the gene can abolish the uniporter's sensitivity to ruthenium red inhibition. Overall, the study establishes that MCU multimers produce mitochondrial calcium currents and bring clarity to the field of mitochondrial calcium transport.
Researchers have discovered a new mechanism by which direct-acting antivirals can block hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. The study focused on heteroaryldihydropyrimidines (HAPs), which can activate and suppress the assembly of HBV's core protein (Cp), and found they can cause capsid distortion and disruption. Cryo-electron microscopy was used to observe capsids in complex with a fluorescent CpAM, HAP-TAMRA, and the slow kinetics of binding suggested the primary barrier for HAP binding is a conformational transition at the site of the binding pocket. The researchers reconstructed T=4 and T=3 Cp150-HAP-TAMRA capsids and the resolution was sufficient to position and rebuild molecular models of protein and HAP-TAMRA.
Anxiety can impair motor learning and adaptability to changes in the task structure. This is due to changes in beta oscillations in the sensorimotor and prefrontal regions of the brain, which affect the updating of reward estimates and the estimation of uncertainty. Anxiety reduces motor variability during initial exploration, which limits improvement in learning. An increase in anxiety leads to underestimation of environmental volatility, which affects the updating of predictions during reward-based motor learning. Models suggest that smaller precision-weighted prediction errors, relating to reward and volatility, constrain trial-to-trial behavioral adaptations in state anxiety. Anxiety-induced changes in the distribution of sensorimotor and prefrontal beta bursts, as well as in beta power, may account for the observed deficits in the update of predictions during reward-based motor learning.
Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a key regulator of transcriptional responses to proteotoxic stress, was found to be linked to estrogen (E2) signaling through estrogen receptor α (ERα) in ER-positive breast cancer cells. HSF1 deficiency reduced ERα level, attenuated the mitogenic action of E2, counteracted E2-stimulated cell scattering, and reduced adhesion to collagens and cell motility. HSF1 deficiency may increase sensitivity to hormonal therapies and CDK4/6 inhibitors. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women worldwide, and HSF1 increases the transcriptome disparity in ER-positive breast cancer and can enhance the genomic action of ERα. HSF1 is a well-known regulator of response to cellular stress induced by various environmental stimuli, and HSF1-regulated chaperones control the activity of estrogen receptors. HSF1 is involved in the regulation of a plethora of non-HSP genes, which support oncogenic processes. A high level of HSF1 expression was found in cancer cell lines and many human tumors and was shown to be associated with the increased mortality of ER-positive breast cancer patients.
A study was conducted to predict neurological recovery after spinal cord injury (SCI) using topological data analysis. Intra-operative monitoring records and neurological outcome data were extracted from 118 patients. Network analysis suggested that time outside of an optimal mean arterial pressure (MAP) range during surgery was associated with lower likelihood of neurological recovery at hospital discharge. The study suggests that deviation from the optimal MAP range during SCI surgery predicts a lower probability of neurological recovery and provides new targets for therapeutic intervention. The data sets analyzed in the study are deposited and accessible at the Open Data Commons for SCI (odc-sci.org).
The transport receptor Crm1 facilitates the export of diverse cargos containing leucine-rich nuclear export signals (NESs) through complex formation with RanGTP. However, mechanisms that allow for efficient assembly of Crm1-export complexes in the nucleus remain poorly understood. In this study, a new type of RanGTP-binding protein called Slx9 is identified which facilitates Crm1 recruitment to the 40S pre-ribosome-associated NES-containing adaptor Rio2. Slx9 functions as a scaffold to optimally present RanGTP and the NES to Crm1, triggering 40S pre-ribosome export. Slx9 is a RanGTP binding protein and functions as an export factor for the 40S pre-ribosome.
Plants employ herbivore-induced defenses, which are rapidly evolving and crucial for their fitness. Induced defenses are often triggered by early defense signaling (EDS), which is rapidly activated by the perception of herbivore-associated elicitors (HAE), including the accumulation of jasmonic acid (JA). A study of 60 HAE-induced leaf transcriptomes from closely related Nicotiana species revealed a key gene co-expression network that is activated with HAE-induced JA accumulations but does not depend on JA. Functional annotations of the gene module were consistent with roles in EDS, and a newly identified hub gene (NaLRRK1) mediates a negative feedback loop with JA signaling. Additionally, the study found that genome-wide duplications played a crucial role in shaping the evolution of HAE-induced EDS in Nicotiana. Closely related Nicotiana species revealed highly specific HAE-induced defenses and provided an ideal system for identifying HAE-induced EDS networks.
Host-parasite interactions are sensitive to temperature, and changes in temperature patterns due to climate change may have a significant impact on disease dynamics. In this study, researchers found that altered temperature variance leads to a shift in thermal performance of host and pathogen life-history traits, and different temperature regimes affect these traits differently. They tested the effects of constant temperatures, diurnal temperature fluctuations, and a 3-day heatwave on infection rates, spore burden, and host fitness using the Daphnia magna-Odospora colligata host-pathogen system. They found that diurnal fluctuations lowered infection rates and reduced spore burden compared to constant temperatures, while a 3-day heatwave did not affect infection rates but increased spore burden at lower temperatures and reduced burden at higher temperatures compared to constant temperatures. Host fitness was generally reduced when exposed to parasites or variable temperatures. The study demonstrates that changing temperature mean and variance can be highly complex and may alter the vulnerability of host populations and impede our ability to accurately predict future disease outbreaks.
A new study on mice has found that pregnancy after the age of 35 increases the risk of long-term breast cancer. However, a pregnancy before the age of 22 can lower the risk. The study suggests this is because pregnancy can cause the few early lesions that have already developed in the otherwise normal breast to progress to cancer more quickly, due to apoptosis evasion. Short-term anti-STAT5 treatment of lactation-completed mice bearing early lesions eliminates the increased risk after a pregnancy. The findings suggest that it is critical to identify the molecular mechanism underlying increased long-term breast cancer risk in parous women who had a late-age first pregnancy, so that prevention strategies may be developed to reduce this risk.    

The specific mutation V600E in the BRAF hydrophobic activation segment (AS) pocket accounts for more than 95% of all kinase mutations in cancer, but it is not clear why other mutations in the hydrophobic pocket are not found with high frequency in cancer. By using experimental and in silico structure-energy statistical analyses, researchers have identified that BRAF mutation frequencies depend on the equilibrium between the destabilization of the hydrophobic pocket, the overall folding energy, the activation of the kinase and the number of bases required to change the corresponding amino acid. These findings can be applied to genome-wide association studies and prediction models to determine which missense mutations affect disease phenotype.
Researchers have discovered a protein modification that could be used to prevent neuronal hyperexcitability and seizures in cases of epilepsy. Scientists have found that methylation of KCNQ by protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (Prmt1) acts to positively regulate KCNQ channel activity, thus preventing seizures. Prmt1 depletion can lower PIP2 affinity of KCNQ2 channels and thereby the channel activities, and Prmt1 interacts and methylates at four arginine residues of KCNQ channels. Prmt1-dependent facilitation of KCNQ-PIP2 interaction underlies the positive regulation of KCNQ activity by arginine methylation. The researchers propose that Prmt1-dependent regulation of KCNQ channels represents an important mechanism of neuronal protection against over-excitability.
The article discusses the role of CENP-A containing chromatin in the epigenetic definition of the centromere, and its importance for the inheritance of centromeres during cell division. The research involves building cell lines in which the entire CENP-A pool is fluorescent to determine the absolute copy number of CENP-A at centromeres. Through quantitative view of the centromere, the research aims to provide a mechanistic framework for both robust epigenetic inheritance of centromeres and the relative scarcity of neocentromere formation. The study concludes that centromeric CENP-A levels are directly regulated by its protein expression levels.
Centrioles are made up of long-lived microtubules arranged in nine triplets, but the role of these triplet microtubules in mammalian centriole formation and stability is largely unknown. This article reports that delta-tubulin and epsilon-tubulin are necessary for the formation of triplet microtubules in centrioles, and mutant human cells lacking these tubulins lack triplet microtubules and fail to undergo centriole maturation. The aberrant centrioles formed in these cells are unstable and do not persist to the next cell cycle, leading to a futile cycle of centriole formation and disintegration. Disintegration can be suppressed by paclitaxel treatment. The major microtubule organizing center of mammalian cells, the centrosome, is composed of a pair of centrioles with associated appendages and pericentriolar material. Members of the tubulin superfamily, including delta-tubulin and epsilon-tubulin, are critical for centriole formation and function.
Stress has a significant effect on the mammalian brain, particularly on the hippocampus, an area responsible for memory function. The effect of acute stress on neural stem/progenitor cells (NPCs) in the hippocampus is unclear, but recent research suggests that brief stress may enhance neural function. In rodents, moderate stress has been found to improve memory function while severe stress impairs it. The hippocampus is highly sensitive to stress hormones and glucocorticoids (GCs). Immature neurons in the hippocampus have enhanced excitability, which contributes to a disproportionately large role in new memory formation. Studies have shown that chronic stress impairs memory function and suppresses proliferation and differentiation of new neurons in the adult DG. However, the effect of acute stress on neurogenesis is unclear. Some studies have shown no change in proliferation following acute stressors, while others have found that acute stress enhances expression of mitogenic growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2), thereby potentially increasing neurogenesis. This study investigated the effect of acute stress on adult hippocampal neurogenesis and found that acute stress or corticosterone administration increased dorsal but not ventral hippocampus cell proliferation in adult rats. This increase in proliferation occurred independent of input from the basolateral amygdala neural input and was accompanied by an increase in FGF2 expression in dorsal hippocampal astrocytes. Furthermore, the study found that astrocyte-secreted FGF2 mediated stress-hormone-induced NPC proliferation. The study also found enhancement in hippocampus-dependent memory and newborn neuron activation two weeks after acute stress. These findings suggest a beneficial role for brief stress on the hippocampus, and may improve understanding of the adaptive capacity of the brain.
Enhancers and silencers, which regulate gene expression, are difficult to distinguish based on epigenetic markers alone. A study using photoreceptor TF CRX in mouse retinas found that while both enhancers and silencers contain more transcription factor motifs than inactive sequences, enhancers contain a wider range of motifs. A new measure of information content (motif diversity) was developed to distinguish enhancers from silencers. By examining CRX-targeted sequences in the genome, it was found that strong enhancers are uniquely enriched for several lineage-defining transcription factors. Two models were trained to differentiate strong enhancers from silencers, one using a support vector machine and the other a logistic regression model including eight lineage-defining transcription factors. The models outperformed random selection of TFs in distinguishing between strong enhancers and silencers.
Researchers investigated whether rhodopsin, the most abundant outer segment protein and visual pigment, is instrumental in delivering proteins to the sensory cilia of photoreceptor cells. The study found that guanylate cyclase-1, which produces the cGMP second messenger in photoreceptors, requires rhodopsin for intracellular stability and outer segment delivery. The research sheds insight into how proteins populate the sensory cilium organelle and expands rhodopsin’s role in directing the trafficking of key phototransduction proteins.
The study examined the role of CAMSAP homologs in microtubule dynamics in neurons and found that loss of function mutations in the C. elegans CAMSAP, ptrn-1, caused defects in neuron and neuromuscular morphology. The study showed that PTRN-1 localizes to both neurites and synapses suggesting that microtubule stabilization is necessary for morphological maintenance of neurons. The study proposes a model whereby minus-end microtubule stabilization mediated by a functional PTRN-1 is necessary for the stabilization of mature neurite morphology. The conserved mitogen-activated protein kinase DLK-1 functions to transmit regenerative signals in C. elegans, and is a component of regenerative signaling in organisms with more complex nervous systems. The study also found that alterations to microtubule structures caused by loss of CAMSAP function activates a neuronal remodeling program. The study suggests that locally stabilizing microtubules via CAMSAPs is necessary for maintaining neuronal connectivity and that understanding disruptions to CAMSAP function may provide insights into disease mechanisms.
Regulatory RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are responsible for controlling alternative splicing (AS) programs. The identification of master splicing regulators could provide insight into how cell-specific splicing networks are controlled. The RNA-Binding Protein with Multiple Splicing (RBPMS) has been identified as a critical splicing regulator in differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs). RBPMS regulates the AS of components of the actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesion machineries critical for SMC function. Additionally, RBPMS regulates splicing of other splicing, post-transcriptional and transcription regulators including the key SMC transcription factor, Myocardin. The identification of RBPMS validates the approach of identifying cell-specific regulators via the proximity of their genes to super-enhancers. RBPMS meets the criteria expected of an AS master regulator in SMCs. Manipulation of RBPMS levels confirmed its importance in shaping SMC transcriptomes, particularly in regulating cassette exons.
The article describes a study that used Promoter Capture Hi-C to map chromosomal interactions involving gene promoters in human pluripotent and lineage-committed cells. The results reveal extensive dynamics of cis-regulatory contacts upon lineage commitment, including the acquisition and loss of promoter interactions. This reorganization is associated with changes in target gene expression and provides insights into the transcriptional control of early human development. The study provides a global, high-resolution atlas of chromosomal interactions and offers new insights into the architecture of long-range cis-regulatory elements.
Researchers have found that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a DNA sensor that activates innate immunity. When cytoplasmic DNA is present in a cell, DNA-PK acts as a pattern recognition receptor, binding to DNA and triggering the transcription of type 1 interferon, cytokine, and chemokine genes. Without DNA-PK, the cytokine response to both DNA and DNA viruses is attenuated, but it is not impacted by RNA or RNA virus infections. While DNA-PK is known for its role in DNA repair and severe combined immunodeficiency, this study has identified its novel antimicrobial function, which has implications for host defence, vaccine development, and autoimmune disorders.
The mushroom body in Drosophila plays an important role in associative memory and decision-making processes. It processes a variety of sensory information and is most extensively studied in olfactory memory. Sparse activity of ∼2000 Kenyon cells representing odor identity converge onto 34 output neurons (MBONs) of 21 types in the mushroom body lobes. In order to understand how memory is translated into changes in behavior, experimental access to a comprehensive set of MBONs is necessary. Valence encoded by the MBON ensemble biases memory-based action selection through local, stimulus-specific dopaminergic modulation that selectively alters the balance within the MBON network for those stimuli. Each of the 15 MB compartments functions as an elemental valuation system that receives reward or punishment signals, and translates the pattern of Kenyon cell activity to a MBON output that serves to bias behavior by altering either attraction or aversion. All but one of the 21 MBON cell types consists of only one or two cells per hemisphere. By studying optogenetic activation of MBONs, scientists have found that depending on cell type, MBONs can induce repulsion or attraction in flies.
This study explores the potential of the vestibular morphology (inner ear) for resolving controversial phylogenetic relationships of fossil apes. The study uses a deformation-based 3D geometric morphometric analysis to test and quantify the phylogenetic signal in the vestibular shape of extant anthropoids and two extinct apes. The study finds that the vestibular morphology displays strong phylogenetic signal and proposes potential synapomorphies for various hominoid clades. It also confirms the relevance of vestibular morphology for addressing the controversial phylogenetic relationships of fossil apes. The study highlights the importance of finding morphological features that are less prone to homoplasy to better resolve the phylogeny of Miocene hominoids. The study concludes that the analysis of the vestibular morphology shows promise for resolving controversial phylogenetic relationships of fossil apes.
Marsupials and monotremes are born before their jaw joint has fully developed, leading researchers to investigate how they feed without it. They found that these animals use the cartilaginous incus in the middle ear to stabilise the jaw against the cranial base, allowing them to feed. Different animals use different strategies for coping with this early birth, with marsupials relying on lactation and monotremes sucking milk from a flattened but protuberant areola on the mother's abdomen. Additionally, monotremes and marsupials have different craniomandibular articulation points, with monotremes using a double cranio-mandibular articulation and marsupials using a cushion of extra-cellular matrix-rich mesenchyme located between the incus and petrosal. These findings provide insight into the evolution of mammals and the changing relationship between the jaw and ear.
Ants regulate their food intake through a distributed process, where a small fraction of workers collect food, store it in their crops, and transfer it to other ants via trophallactic interactions. The individual-level mechanism of this collective regulation was unclear due to the difficulty in measuring food in the ants' crops. However, by using fluorescent imaging, researchers were able to track real-time food flow from foragers to their colonies and study the feedback between colony satiation level and food inflow. They found that individual crop loads of recipient ants control food flow rates, while those of foragers regulate the frequency of foraging-trips, without requiring individual foragers to assess the global state of the colony. This distributed regulation mechanism allows ants to tightly manage their food intake.
Image3C (Image-Cytometry Cell Classification) is a new image-based classification methodology that doesn't require species-specific reagents or pre-existing knowledge about the sample. Image3C uses intrinsic cellular features and non-species-specific dyes to perform de novo cell composition analysis and detect changes in cell populations across different conditions. Image3C combines image-based flow cytometry with an unbiased, high-throughput cell clustering pipeline and convolutional neural network (CNN) integration. Image3C expands the use of image-based analyses of cell population composition to research organisms in which detailed cellular phenotypes are unknown or for which species-specific reagents are not available.
The study aimed to test if seasonal migration in European Blackbirds offered survival benefits compared to year-round residency. Using capture-mark-recapture and radio telemetry, data was collected over seven years comparing survival probabilities between migrant and resident blackbirds. The results showed that migrant blackbirds had a 16% higher probability of surviving winter than residents. The study also estimated the reproductive benefits of residency (access to better breeding territories) required for residents to outweigh the survival benefits of migration, concluding that if residents had 61.25% higher breeding success, then the fitness benefits of resident and migrant blackbirds would be equal. The study found no evidence for sex differences in survival, but there was a higher prevalence of female migration.
Scientists have discovered peptides derived from bovine antibodies that bind to complement C5, a clinically validated drug target for diseases with pathogenic complement dysregulation. The peptides, known as knob domains, were found to have therapeutic potential, as well as demonstrating allosteric effects on C5, with one selectively inhibiting C5 cleavage by the alternative pathway C5 convertase. This study expands the therapeutic scope of C5, presenting new inhibitors and demonstrating the potential of knob domains as low molecular weight antibody fragments. The discovery of knob domain peptides was established using complement component C5, and the method involves immunisation of cattle, cell sorting of B-cells using fluorescently labelled antigen, followed by a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to create a library of antigen-specific CDRH3 sequences.
Researchers have investigated the mechanism of unresponsiveness to PD-1 blockade therapy, which has revolutionized cancer treatments, and found that unresponsive tumors can be categorized into two groups: those with and without systemic immunosuppressive property (SIP). SIP-positive tumors released uncharacterized, non-proteinaceous small molecules that inhibited mitochondrial activation and T cell proliferation, while SIP-negative tumors escaped from immunity by losing MHC class I expression. Unresponsiveness of SIP-positive tumors was partially overcome by improving the mitochondrial function with a mitochondrial activator, while unresponsive tumors without SIP were completely ignored, possibly due to less neoantigen and/or lack of MHC class I expression. The study highlights the complexity of tumor and immunity interactions and suggests that the elimination of suppressive factors would facilitate the enhancement of PD-1 blockade therapeutic efficacy only in unresponsive tumors with SIP.
T cell populations respond heterogeneously to antigenic stimuli due to variability within clonal populations, but can communicate via cytokines. However, cytokine production can be dominated by the precursor frequency of antigen-specific T cells. This study found that T cells collectively scale their output of IL-2 to total antigen input independently of population size due to an inhibitory cross-talk between antigen and IL-2 signaling and nonlinear acceleration of IL-2 secretion per cell. This enables variably sized groups of T cells to respond proportionally to a large range of stimuli. This knowledge could facilitate immune monitoring and aid in understanding how variability within isogenic T cell populations yields heterogeneous signaling responses.
Researchers have traced the natural history of a retrovirus lineage that exhibited global spread between about 33 million and 15 million years ago, and played a significant role in the diversification of hosts representing at least 11 mammalian orders. By examining the “fossil” record left behind in mammals’ genomes, the scientists identified patterns of adaptation that demonstrate selection to maintain essential viral protein functions. The discovery could provide valuable insights into the emerging consequences of new viral infections.
The article describes an experimental study that used a genetic selection to discover protein variants of the chaperone Spy that show improved chaperone activity against various substrates. The study found that the “Super Spy” variants show tighter binding to client proteins and are more unstable than the wild-type Spy, suggesting that disorder and flexibility are important in chaperone function. The article also discusses the selection method used, which links protein stability to antibiotic resistance, as well as the crystal structure of Spy and its interaction with client proteins. Overall, the study provides evidence for the importance of disorder and flexibility in chaperone function and sheds light on the mechanism of chaperone-protein interaction.
Researchers have discovered a gene responsible for the formation of the Casparian strip, the cell layer in plant roots that represents the main barrier to extracellular diffusion and is crucial for nutrient uptake. The gene, known as SGN3, is a receptor-like kinase that is necessary for localizing key components of the strip, called CASPARIAN STRIP DOMAIN PROTEINS (CASPs), which form a critical part of the endodermal differentiation process. The study demonstrates the importance of the Casparian strip in selective nutrient uptake in plant roots and allows for further investigation into plant nutrient homeostasis.
The document discusses the process of brain folding and the different models proposed to explain it. The murine cerebellum was used to challenge the existing models with in vivo data, and it was found that at the initiation of folding, differential expansion is created by the outer layer of proliferating progenitors expanding faster than the core. However, the stiffness differential and compressive forces required by elastic material models are not present. It was also observed that the outer layer expansion is uniform and fluid-like, and that the cerebellum is under radial and circumferential constraints. A multi-phase model incorporating differential expansion of a fluid outer layer and radial and circumferential constraints approximates the in vivo shape evolution observed during initiation of cerebellar folding. The findings of this study have implications for understanding human cerebral cortex folding.
This article discusses the importance of proper chromosome segregation during meiosis, a process that is essential for the formation of gametes in sexually reproducing organisms. The authors show that preventing premature interactions between microtubules and kinetochores during premeiotic S phase and prophase I is essential for establishing the unique meiosis I chromosome segregation pattern, which involves homologous chromosomes segregating while sister chromatids remain together. The authors propose that inhibition of microtubule-kinetochore interactions during these early stages of meiosis is critical for establishing the proper chromosome architecture. The article also discusses the role of cyclin-CDK regulation in meiotic chromosome segregation, specifically the consequences of premature expression of different cyclins. The authors show that premature expression of CLB1, CLB3, or CLB4 induces sister chromatid segregation during the first meiotic division, while CLB5 does not. Overall, the article highlights the intricate mechanisms involved in proper chromosome segregation during meiosis and the importance of temporal control of microtubule-kinetochore interactions in establishing the unique meiosis I chromosome segregation pattern.
Calcium-activated chloride channel regulator 1 (CLCA1) is a secreted protein that activates calcium-dependent chloride currents. TMEM16A/Anoctamin1 has been identified as the channel that conducts these currents. It was found that CLCA1 activates TMEM16A in a paracrine fashion by increasing the expression of TMEM16A on the surface of cells. CLCA1 co-localizes and interacts with TMEM16A, stabilizing it on the cell surface, which leads to increased calcium-dependent chloride currents. This study identifies the first CLCA family protein that targets a specific chloride channel and establishes CLCA1 as the first secreted regulator of TMEM16A activity. The study has significant implications for how these two proteins work together in influencing tissue physiology and the pathology of several diseases including asthma, COPD, cystic fibrosis, and certain cancers.
This document introduces visualization methods for conductance-based models of neural activity to help understand the dynamics of ionic currents and the response of models to perturbations. The document uses evolutionary techniques to optimize a family of score functions to find parameters so that the activity of the models reaches a desired target. The document also explains how to compute and display the distributions of waveforms to represent changes over a range of the perturbation control parameter. The approach can be used to explore why individual neurons or networks with similar behavior can respond widely differently to perturbations.
The molecular nature of lateral diffusion barriers, that compartmentalize the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in cells, is unknown. Here we show that misfolded proteins of the ER remain confined in the mother compartment of budding yeast cells due to a lateral diffusion barrier in the form of a distinct domain of the ER-membrane at the bud neck, in a septin-, Bud1 GTPase- and sphingolipid-dependent manner. Barrier-dependent confinement of ER stress into the mother cell promotes aging. Further investigation is needed to understand the mechanisms and composition of these barriers.
Researchers have discovered new information about how the body processes mature messenger RNA (mRNA) that could have implications for understanding the genetic underpinning of conditions such as cancer and autism. Current models say that after splicing, mRNA joins with a complex of proteins called the exon junction complex (EJC), which triggers the production of proteins using cellular machinery known as ribosomes. However, researchers found that EJC proteins bind not only with spliced mRNA, but with immature nascent mRNA transcripts as well, meaning the EJC could play a role in gene expression independent of splicing.
Scientists have sequenced the genomes of three bioluminescent beetle species, including two firefly species that diverged over 100 million years ago. The study sheds light on the evolutionary history of bioluminescence within beetles, revealing that fireflies and click beetles gained bioluminescence independently. The research also provides new insights into the genes, chemical defenses, and symbionts that evolved alongside their luminous lifestyle. The study found that firefly luciferase, widely used in biotechnology, is hypothesized to be derived from an ancestral peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA synthetase.
The document discusses a study on paranoia and learning differences, particularly in relation to uncertainty and belief updating. The study involved a non-social, three-option learning task, use of a Hierarchical Gaussian Filter (HGF) model, and testing on individuals with and without mental illness, online participants, and rats exposed to methamphetamine. The results suggest that paranoia is associated with a stronger prior on volatility, which may lead to impaired learning through unexpected uncertainty and rigid anticipation of a volatile environment. The study sheds light on the fundamental learning differences in paranoid individuals and the interplay between uncertainty and belief updating across individuals and species.
The study analyzes the adaptation of proteins in mammals to viruses and whether adaptation is limited to specialized antiviral proteins or affects a broad array of virus-interacting proteins. The analysis shows that viruses use the more evolutionarily constrained proteins within the cellular functions they interact with, and virus-interacting proteins account for a high proportion of all protein adaptation in humans and other mammals across all functional categories. The study estimates that viruses have driven close to 30% of all adaptive amino acid changes in the part of the human proteome conserved within mammals. While specialized antiviral proteins have exceptionally high rates of adaptation, most virus-interacting proteins play key functions in basic cellular processes. Furthermore, VIPs tend to interact with proteins that are functionally important hubs, possibly limiting their ability to adapt. The study analyzes patterns of evolutionary constraint and adaptation in a high-quality set of ~1300 VIPs. The study uses the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous polymorphisms as a measure of purifying selection and the McDonald-Kreitman test to evaluate the prevalence of positive selection in VIPs compared to non-VIPs in the human lineage and in mammals in general. The study confirms that VIPs evolve slowly, but despite this constraint, VIPs display higher rates of adaptation compared to other proteins. Finally, the study showcases the power of global scanning for adaptation in VIPs by studying parallel adaptive evolution in aminopeptidase N in response to coronaviruses in a wide range of mammals.
The process of replacing larval epidermal cells with adult cells in the formation of the Drosophila adult abdomen involves a complex series of events including histoblast proliferation and migration. At pupal development, the microRNA miR-965 is downregulated by ecdysone signaling, enabling histoblast cell replacement of the larval epidermis. MiR-965 regulates histoblast proliferation and migration. The loss of miR-965 leads to abdominal segmentation defects in adult Drosophila. Using time-lapse videos, the asynchronous division of miR-965 histoblasts and the programmed death of some cells was observed. The rate of histoblast migration was slower in miR-965 mutants compared to controls.
The presence of transposon-silencing Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) prevents transposition from causing ovarian atrophy syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis, GD) in Drosophila. Harwich (Har) strains with P-elements cause severe GD in F1 daughters when Har fathers mate with mothers lacking P-element-piRNAs, and the Har-induced GD phenotype in certain "P" strains like Har has remained a mystery. A highly truncated P-element variant called "Har-P" was discovered, and Har-P's were found to be paternally suppressed by P-element-piRNA-directed repression to suppress somatic transposition. The study discovered that Har-P-like elements are the cause of severe GD, but not the number of P-elements, and that the de novo P-element transpositions resulted in novel transposon landscapes that are completely distinct from the parental Har genome.
Researchers have developed a method to detect and manipulate specific cell populations using genetically expressed nanobodies that target untagged proteins (antigens) in the intracellular environment. These nanobodies have been used for applications such as optogenetic control of neural activity and detection of HIV-infected cells. However, nanobodies are usually stable regardless of antigen expression, complicating their use for cell-specific applications. The researchers have created a conditional system where the stability of nanobodies depends on the presence of the antigen of interest. They have identified nanobody framework mutations that can be used to rapidly create destabilized nanobodies that can be fused to proteins for use in living cells for cell-specific applications.
Cell polarization and migration is controlled by signals in the environment, and migrating cells typically form filopodia that extend from the cell surface, but the precise function of these structures in cell polarization and guided migration is poorly understood. Using the in vivo model of zebrafish primordial germ cells for studying chemokine-directed single-cell migration, researchers found for the first time that filopodia play an important role in cell polarization, influencing reactions of intracellular pH and Rac1 activity at the cell front. This polarity enables the directed migration of these cells towards the target. Filopodia act as a sensing organelle and are important for generating traction forces, and serve to transport signalling molecules to neighbouring cells. The specific consequence of impaired filopodia formation in migrating single cells in vivo and their role in intact tissue are not clearly known. As a useful in vivo model for exploring the regulation and function of filopodia in cell migration, scientists employed zebrafish primordial germ cells (PGCs), demonstrating that in response to Cxcl12a gradients in the environment, filopodia exhibit polar distribution around the cell perimeter and alter their structural and dynamic characteristics.
A study of over 600 cancer cell lines found that many jettisoned either the Y chromosome or the inactive X, leading to male and female cells converging and becoming "de-sexualized". The active X often doubled, accompanied by the addition of one haploid complement of autosomes, leading to an X:A ratio of 2:3 from the extant ratio of 1:2. Theoretical modeling of the frequency distribution of X:A karyotypes suggests that the 2:3 ratio confers a higher fitness and may reflect aspects of sex chromosome evolution. The research sheds light on the emergence of mammalian sex chromosomes and their subsequent evolution. Moreover, cancer cell lines usually have high rates of aneuploidy and could be heterogeneous within a given line, thus making its status difficult to assess.
Senescent cells in fat tissue are linked to age-related dysfunction, particularly in adipogenesis and lipid storage. These cells secrete inhibitory factors such as activin A that directly impede adipogenesis in non-senescent cells, leading to impaired lipid accumulation and reduced adipogenic capacity. The authors demonstrated that senescent cells can spread this senescence or inflammatory activation to nearby non-senescent cells. They suggest that targeting senescent cells or their products may alleviate impaired adipogenesis, lipodystrophy, and metabolic dysfunction that occur with age, and that JAK1/2 inhibitors may be a potential therapy for these conditions.
The success of social species, including humans and many insects, may be due to their ability to form complex societies. Cooperation within these societies has a variety of benefits, including coping with environmental challenges and interspecific competition. To determine how group-living impacts the generalist-specialist behavioral tradeoff and its subsequent effect on niche breadth (defined as a thermal performance that influences elevational distribution), researchers examined the facultative cooperatively breeding burying beetle (Nicrophorus nepalensis). They found that cooperative groups performed as thermal generalists with similarly high breeding success at all temperatures and elevations, whereas non-cooperative groups performed as thermal specialists with higher breeding success only at intermediate temperatures and elevations. The results may help us understand why social species have come to dominate the earth and determine how climate change will affect social species.
The recycling of synaptic vesicles (SVs) is important for neurotransmission, but little is known about the molecular regulation of the process. The small GTPase ADP ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6) has been found to play a role in trafficking between plasma membranes and early endosomes, and a recent study investigated its role in SV recycling. The study found that Arf6 silencing in hippocampal synapses led to an accumulation of endosome-like organelles and an increase in release-competent SVs. This was due to Arf6's role in channeling retrieved SVs toward direct recycling rather than endosomal sorting. The study also found that mutations in Arf6 regulatory genes have been associated with intellectual disability and epilepsy in humans. The study demonstrates the importance of Arf6 in the recycling of SVs and shedding light on potential implications for human neurological conditions.
The document discusses the importance of nucleation in self-assembly and how to delay it to achieve high production yield. Using mathematical modeling to analyze self-assembly into finite-sized target structures, the study investigates two scenarios - introducing a slow activation step for the assembling constituents and decreasing the dimerization rate - and finds that the occurrence of a stochastic yield catastrophe does not depend on model details but rather is a generic factor when taking into account number fluctuations between constituents. The study also considers the assembly of a fixed number of well-defined target structures from limited resources and notes that nucleation phenomena play a critical role for self-assembly processes. The research finds that for large particle numbers, perfect yield can be achieved by decreasing either the activation rate or the dimerization rate below their respective threshold values. However, in the activation scenario, the yield saturation value decreases with low particle numbers until no finished structures are produced. This fluctuation-induced suppression effect is not captured in a deterministic description.
The study investigates the role of oxygen in biofilm formation by Staphylococcus aureus, a bacterium responsible for several infections in humans. Biofilms are communities of microorganisms that facilitate chronic and persistent infections. The study shows that oxygen influences biofilm formation by acting as a terminal electron acceptor for cellular respiration in S. aureus. Inhibition of respiratory processes results in increased biofilm formation and cell lysis due to altered regulation of AtlA murein hydrolase and wall-teichoic acids. Two-component regulatory systems, such as SrrAB, govern biofilm formation under anaerobic conditions. The study concludes that decreased cellular respiration results in increased biofilm formation and that biofilm formation is responsive to the concentration of terminal electron acceptors, which are essential for respiration in S. aureus.
Microorganisms conserve energy through respiration and fermentation, but recent work shows some can use alternative strategies, such as extracellular electron transfer. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB), which mainly use fermentation, were explored to see if they could use extracellular electron transfer to conserve energy. The LAB Lactiplantibacillus plantarum was found to use extracellular electron transfer to generate more ATP, faster biomass accumulation and an increased NAD+/NADH ratio, which can impact fermentation product yield, metabolic flux, and environmental acidification. The hybrid metabolism depends on a type-II NADH dehydrogenase (Ndh2) and conditionally requires a flavin-binding extracellular lipoprotein (PplA) under laboratory conditions. The discovery expands the knowledge of energy conservation and has immediate biotechnology applications related to food fermentations. Moreover, the ability of microorganisms to extract energy and maintain cellular functions is directly linked to their environment, including the availability of nutrients and interactions with other organisms. LAB growth rates and cell yields are limited by access to electron acceptors to maintain intracellular redox balance during substrate-level phosphorylation. The study investigates the ability of L. plantarum to reduce extracellular electron acceptors and shows that it can reduce insoluble ferrihydrite, a mechanism similar to L. monocytogenes. The study also looked at other LAB species and found that the FLEET locus is conserved, and the homofermentative LAB species can use EET. The study provides insights into energy conservation strategies in primarily fermentative microorganisms and the implications of this trait on lactic acid fermentations in food biotechnology.
This document discusses integrins, which are transmembrane receptors made up of alpha and beta subunits. The activation mechanisms of integrins have been studied primarily in the platelet integrin αIIbβ3, but it is unclear if all integrins function in the same way. The authors found structural differences between β1 and β3 integrin subunits, and observed differences in function between the two. Additionally, the "snorkeling" lysine that regulates αIIbβ3 activation by ion pairing with nearby lipids plays opposite roles in β1 and β3 integrin function, and is not responsible for TM tilt. The authors also investigated the effect of reversing the charge on the snorkeling lysine near the TM domain of the β1 integrin, which significantly decreased integrin α1β1 and α2β1-dependent adhesion to and spreading on collagens by polarized CD epithelial cells. Structural studies were also carried out to probe the basis for the discrepancies between the results obtained with β1 and β3 integrins.
The Piezo1 channel plays an important role in bone formation by functioning as a mechanotransducer, converting mechanical stimuli into osteogenesis. Knocking out Piezo1 in osteoblast lineage cells disrupts osteogenesis and impairs bone structure and strength. Piezo1 also appears to mediate the mechanical response and function of differentiated osteoblasts. Piezo1 may be a novel therapeutic target for treating osteoporosis or mechanical unloading-induced severe bone loss.
The study shows that noncanonical IκB kinases IKKε and TBK1, which are induced during obesity-induced inflammation, reduce sensitivity to β-adrenergic stimulation in adipocytes, leading to decreased energy expenditure contributing to the repression of energy expenditure during obesity. More specifically, IKKε and TBK1 phosphorylate and activate the major adipocyte phosphodiesterase PDE3B, resulting in decreased levels of cAMP in adipocytes. By inhibiting these kinases with the drug amlexanox, the study found that obesity-induced catecholamine resistance can be reversed, potentially increasing energy expenditure as an anti-obesity and anti-diabetes therapy. The study also notes that TNFα, a proinflammatory cytokine commonly secreted in obesity, induces the expression of IKKε and TBK1, ultimately decreasing sensitivity to β-adrenergic stimulation in adipocytes.
Researchers at the Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel and the University of Basel, Switzerland have uncovered the mechanism of how the neural retina develops in the eye. They found almost the entire bi-layered optic vesicle gives rise to the neural retina, rather than it bending around the developing lens. Zebrafish were used as a model and optic vesicle development was investigated through in vivo time-lapse microscopy. The study suggests that optic cup formation is driven mainly by the ventral regions and this has implications for different aspects of eye development.
Researchers using X-ray crystallography have observed previously unseen conformational dynamics in the C-cluster of the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH), which is used to catalyze the reduction of CO2 to CO. They reveal that this novel, oxidized cluster arrangement plays a role in avoiding irreversible oxidative degradation at the C-cluster. Mutagenesis testing of part of the CODH molecule suggests that the oxidized conformation could be important for proper cluster assembly, particularly for supporting metal incorporation. These findings lay a foundation for future investigations of C-cluster activation and assembly, and contribute to a paradigm of metallocluster plasticity.
This document discusses the role of ankyrins and their spectrin partners in organizing micron-scale membrane domains in different tissues. Ankyrin repeats bind to numerous membrane proteins and link them to spectrin-based cytoskeletons at specific membrane microdomains. The target binding groove of ANK repeats must be regulated to achieve spatially defined functions of ankyrins/target complexes in different tissues. The autoinhibition mechanism of ankyrin-B/G has been investigated and found to be inhibited by combinatorial and quasi-independent bindings of multiple disordered segments located in the ankyrin-B/G linkers and tails, suggesting a mechanistic basis for differential regulations of membrane target bindings by ankyrins. Mutations of ankyrins are associated with various diseases in humans. The document also includes details about the structure and organization of ankyrins, as well as their evolutionary history.
This study aimed to understand how attention interacts with the structure of cortical neurons' receptive fields. The researchers measured neuronal responses in area V4 of two monkeys and found that attention interacts uniformly with the spatially-varying excitation and suppression associated with the receptive field, explaining the large variability in attention modulation across neurons. They also discovered a non-additive relationship among stimulus selectivity, stimulus-induced suppression, and attention modulation. A spatially-tuned normalization model precisely accounted for all observed attention modulations and for the spatial summation properties of neurons, providing a unified account of spatial summation and attention-related modulation across both the classical receptive field and the surround. The study involved a visual detection task in which the monkeys directed their attention toward different stimulus locations and improved their performance considerably.
Researchers have developed a synthetic biology framework to approach cell fate determination, a process by which cells transition into their final states, through studying the concept of multistability, the ability of a system to achieve mutually exclusive states in response to environmental inputs. In order to achieve a clear view of the situation, synthetic multistable gene networks in E. Coli, which behave as attractor landscapes that enable close experimental investigations of general principle of gene regulatory networks, were used. The team used a combination of experimental and computational modeling to demonstrate that QUADRA - the synthetic gene circuit with mutual inhibition and auto-activations - was quadruple cell fate determinable, with cells gravitating towards local minima, modulating the landscape through sequential inductions to attain different fates. The researchers say their findings fill a gap in knowledge on how gene regulatory networks, gene expression noise, and signal induction together determine a cell's developmental trajectory to its final fates.
Researchers have developed a new proximity ligation in situ hybridisation (PLISH) technique that enables researchers to rapidly and scalably profile single cell expression in tissue. The technique uses hybridization probes to show RNA molecules with fluorescent puncta that can be quantitatively analysed. This technique allows the identification of different cell types and anatomic re-mapping of cells. PLISH is suitable for formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues, and it can be performed concurrently with immunostaining. PLISH can impact a broad range of medical and basic research areas that require single cell profiling of RNAs.
The article discusses the high-energy lifestyle of fruit-eating bats, specifically the Uroderma bilobatum species. These bats primarily fuel themselves with fig juice and have a novel cyclic bradycardic state that reduces daily energetic expenditure by 10% and counteracts heart rates as high as 900 bpm during flight. They have a high metabolic rate, must exchange fat reserves within 24 hours, and are at daily risk of starvation. The article describes the balance and integration of physiological adaptations to energetic limitations and the importance of studying quantitative data from naturally behaving animals in the wild. Finally, the article describes the daily energetic life of Uroderma bilobatum in Gamboa, Panama, and the use of miniaturized heart rate telemetry to understand how these small-bodied, high-metabolic frugivores meet daily energetic demands.
Serum amyloid A (SAA) is a biomarker of inflammation that increases during acute inflammation and has a potential role in innate immunity. Research suggests that SAA and phospholipase A2 (PLA2) act synergistically to remove cellular debris from injured sites, a necessary step for tissue healing. SAA solubilizes phospholipid bilayers, forming lipoproteins that provide substrates for PLA2, and sequesters free fatty acids and lysophospholipids to form stable proteolysis-resistant complexes. The binding of diverse apolar ligands by SAA at a large concave apolar face of the molecule may explain its preferential binding to highly curved apolar surfaces and its ability to solubilize phospholipid bilayers. SAA binds HDL and is an exchangeable apolipoprotein that can transiently dissociate in a labile 'free' form, which can bind other apolar ligands, including cholesterol, retinol, and free fatty acids. Free SAA can augment the lipolysis by PLA2 of diverse substrates, including plasma HDL and LDL, and remodeled phospholipid bilayers into smaller highly curved HDL-sized particles that are readily hydrolyzed by sPLA2.
The transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 9 (Klf9) plays a role in regulating neural stem cell expansion in the adult hippocampus. The identities of TFs that regulate radial-glial neural stem cell (RGL) symmetric self-renewal are not known. Klf9 is elevated in quiescent RGLs and its deletion promotes RGL activation state, functioning as a brake on RGL symmetric self-renewal. In vivo translational profiling of RGLs lacking Klf9 showed upregulation of genetic programs underlying Notch and mitogen signaling, cell cycle, fatty acid oxidation, and lipogenesis. Klf9 expression is enriched in quiescent RGLs, and its loss leads to increased symmetric self-renewal and expansion of RGLs. Klf9 impacts RGL clonal composition but does not prevent RGL differentiation into progeny.
A study on ruby-throated hummingbirds found that they use torpor, a deep, short-term form of hypothermia, to cope with energy challenges throughout their annual cycle. During the breeding period, birds consistently entered torpor at a time when they had relatively low remaining fat stores to avoid complete energy depletion. However, this threshold was abandoned in the late summer to facilitate premigratory fattening. During migration, birds used torpor when they had higher fat stores, and the amount of torpor used was positively correlated with fat gain. The study highlights the importance of facultative hypothermia in migratory ecology and the versatility of torpor throughout the annual cycle.
Hox genes are important regulators of embryonic development, particularly in patterning along the rostral-to-caudal body axis. These genes are organized in four genomic clusters, with their relative position impacting their patterns of expression and timing of transcriptional activation. The step-wise progression of Hox gene transcription is fixed at various body levels and can account for the chromatin architectures previously described. The 3D chromatin organization of Hox clusters during their early activation in vivo was analyzed using high-resolution circular chromosome conformation capture, revealing that the stepwise activation occurs in parallel with their physical transition from a negative to a positive domain. The study also revealed a bi-modal compartmentalization, whereby active genes labeled by H3K4me3 are clustered together and physically separated from the inactive genes, labeled by H3K27me3. The study discusses potential mechanisms underlying temporal and spatial colinearities and need for further research to clarify how genomic topology translates into sequential transcriptional activation.
A recent study examines the possible association between excess alcohol consumption and de novo mutations which could lead to autism and ADHD. The standardized incidence ratios of autism and ADHD among individuals with a family history of alcohol use disorders (AUDs) were found to be higher than individuals without an affected parent, which could possibly be causal. The risks are significantly increased among individuals with a family history of AUDs and the incidence rates of autism and ADHD were even more pronounced when the diagnosis of AUDs in parents occurred before the birth of their offspring. If excess alcohol consumption were to be avoided in parents, around 4% of autism and 11% of ADHD in offspring could be avoided.
Researchers have found that the hypothalamus is not simply a passive relay for upstream emotion centres, but instead plays a central role in processes related to emotion states. Defensive behaviours are influenced by internal emotional states such as fear, and according to a paper published in the journal eLife, the hypothalamus plays a key part in these emotional states; this is evidenced by the study of a specific type of hypothalamic neuron used to mediate innate defensive responses. Optogenetic manipulation allowed researchers to test the direct activation of these neurons, which triggered several defensive behaviours. Moreover, when these neurons were ablated or destroyed, the effect was a marked reduction in defensive behaviours.
Stu2p/XMAP215 are microtubule polymerases which use multiple αβ-tubulin-interacting TOG domains to bind to microtubules and promote rapid growth. A study published in eLife reports the TOG2 domain from Stu2p bound to yeast αβ-tubulin. The study showed that TOG1-TOG2 binds non-cooperatively to two αβ-tubulins. The authors propose this is because the tethering two TOG domains can concentrate unpolymerized αβ-tubulin near the microtubule end, promoting catalyst-like behavior and altering the configuration of the microtubule end. Importantly, the study highlights that curved αβ-tubulin at the microtubule end is the end-specific feature detected by Stu2p/XMAP215 polymerases. The affinity of TOG1 and TOG2 for αβ-tubulin was also measured and appeared relatively tight, forming a 1:1 complex.
Researchers have used computational screening and atomic structures to identify a range of compounds that may reduce cytotoxicity levels in Alzheimer's disease. The compounds bind to Aβ fibers, reducing toxicity levels by up to 90% without actually reducing fibre formation. Protein aggregates including amyloid fibres and smaller amyloid oligomers are linked to Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative conditions. Knowledge of the pharmacophore presented by the ligand binding site of an Aβ segment has allowed the screening of available compounds to identify those that can be expected to bind and stabilise amyloid fibres in Alzheimer's.
Protein kinases are crucial for cellular processes and have diverse specificities that allow for cellular information processing. Understanding the mechanisms underlying kinase diversification is crucial for rationalizing the structures of modern phosphoregulatory networks. By studying the CMGC protein kinases using ancestral reconstruction, researchers have discovered that specificity changed to a strong preference for +1 arginine in the lineage leading to Ime2, via an intermediate with equal specificity for proline and arginine, likely enabling the evolutionary divergence of kinases. Kinases act as hubs of phosphoregulatory networks and can coordinate the activities of hundreds or even thousands of substrates. Tolerance of cells to new specificities likely enabled the evolutionary divergence of kinases, which increases the information processing capacity of the cell, thus enabling the emergence of more complex biological processes. The study also determined a key residue that modulates primary specificity at the +1 position. In addition, positional scanning peptide libraries were used to profile the specificity of various kinases, and findings concluded that the IME2/RCK/LF4 superfamily of kinases have variability at the +1 position. Understanding the mechanisms that drive specificity change and the consequences of these changes is crucial for rationalizing the structures of modern phosphoregulatory networks.
Researchers have identified a drug that can enhance memory and cognitive ability. The drug works by reversing the effect of phosphorylation on a protein that inhibits memory formation. Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2α) reduces protein synthesis and impairs memory. However, a drug called ISRIB can reverse the effect of phosphorylation and improve memory and cognitive ability. In experiments on mice, ISRIB leads to a significant enhancement in spatial and fear-associated learning. The discovery may lead to new treatments for cognitive disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.
The development of therapeutic resistance by tumors is a significant obstacle in the treatment of cancer. Researchers have discovered a protein called LRP16 that facilitates chemoresistance in colorectal cancer by activating a signaling pathway that protects tumor cells from DNA-damaging agents. They also identified a small molecule, MRS2578, which blocks the interaction between LRP16 and the signaling pathway, leading to tumor cell death and preventing colon tumorigenesis. The study suggests that targeting LRP16 could be a way to enhance the efficacy of genotoxicity therapies for the treatment of tumors. The researchers also found that the level of LRP16 expression is progressively elevated during the progression of patients with colorectal cancer, and a low level of LRP16 was associated with better overall survival in these patients.
Researchers have found that the activity of neurons in the striatum, an input structure of the basal ganglia, can predict animals' duration judgments, providing insight into how the brain processes time. Single striatal neurons fired at different times within the interval period and were classified as preferring either short or long stimuli. The firing patterns produced a signal that was potentially useful for guiding choice. When simultaneously recorded ensembles were looked at, the decision was able to be predicted based on the state of the striatal populations. These findings demonstrate that the speed with which striatal population state changes supports the fundamental ability of animals to judge the passage of time.
Male fish can adjust the performance of their ejaculate in response to sperm competition risk in less than 48 hours by upregulating sperm velocity, according to research. Previous studies suggested that the non-sperm component of ejaculate, seminal fluid, could be responsible for rapid changes in sperm velocity. Researchers found this was the case in chinook salmon, and that such adjustments could influence paternity share and reproductive success. Sperm competition occurs commonly in many animal groups and is a powerful evolutionary force.
The human calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a G-protein-coupled receptor that controls extracellular calcium concentrations and regulates parathyroid hormone secretion. It is a homodimer consisting of three main domains, and here researchers present the crystal structures of the entire extracellular domain of CaSR in both inactive and active conformations. They provide evidence that L-amino acids are agonists of the receptor and identify L-Trp as the principal agonist that occupies the orthosteric agonist-binding site. The researchers reveal multiple binding sites for Ca2+ and PO43- ions, where Ca2+ stabilizes the active state and PO43- reinforces the inactive conformation. The activation mechanism of CaSR involves a dimer interface between subunits. Mutations in the CaSR can result in potentially fatal disorders of Ca2+ homeostasis.
A study has identified the specific type of retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) that are responsible for the acute regulation of body temperature in response to light exposure. The researchers found that a subset of ipRGCs that project outside of the central circadian pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), are required for acute light-induced changes in body temperature. The study challenges previous assumptions about the role of the SCN in regulating non-image forming behaviors such as body temperature and sleep, and sheds light on the circuitry and coding mechanisms underlying light's acute effects on human health and behavior.
The unfolded protein response (UPR), which responds to disruptive protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is implicated in many chronic diseases. However, little is known about how it responds to persistent ER stress in vivo. A study in mice led to the finding that persistent cycles of UPR activation and deactivation create an altered, quasi-stable setpoint for UPR-dependent transcriptional regulation. This outcome could be relevant to conditions such as metabolic syndrome, and has implications for the treatment or reversal of chronic diseases resulting from an acute collapse. The study also revealed that acute exposure of cells to high doses of ER stress-inducing drugs is not effective for understanding how the cellular response to chronic stress differs from canonical pathways, so the researchers tested the UPR's response to chronic stress in vivo. They used tunicamycin to induce ER stress in mice, and identified the dose most likely to be tolerated without causing significant toxicity. Animals were found to be capable of maintaining liver function in the face of ongoing stress, and the study suggests that chronic stress creates a novel UPR transcriptional setpoint relevant to pathological states.
The function of eukaryotic cells relies on protein-protein interactions and localization, but the importance of global protein localization and the permissiveness of cells for new protein associations is not well understood. A study using the Synthetic Physical Interaction (SPI) system found that cells are surprisingly tolerant of most protein-protein interactions and protein relocalization. The study involved fusing every protein in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with a partner from every major cellular compartment and assessing the effects on growth. The interactions that perturb growth provide a functional map of spatial protein regulation and identify key regulatory complexes for the normal homeostasis of eukaryotic cells. The SPIs provide a powerful tool to complement existing physical and genetic interactions. The system uses a GFP-binding protein (GBP) derived from an alpaca antibody, which, when fused to a target protein of interest, creates binary associations in vivo with GFP-tagged proteins. Fluorescent imaging confirms that most synthetic protein-protein interactions occur without causing growth defects. The microscopy analysis shows that roughly equal instances of the GBP protein recruiting the GFP protein as the reverse.
Mobile integrons are genetic platforms that allow bacteria to shuffle antibiotic resistance cassettes in response to antibiotic pressure. This recombination and expression system is thought to allow bacteria to rapidly evolve resistance to antibiotics. To test this hypothesis, a custom three-cassette integron was inserted into a strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and experimental evolution was used to measure the impact of integrase activity on adaptation to gentamicin. The results showed that integrase activity accelerated evolution by increasing the expression of a gentamicin resistance cassette through duplications and by eliminating redundant cassettes, providing support for the 'adaptation on demand' hypothesis. Mobile integrons are a widespread element found in many species of bacteria and have played an important role in the evolution of antibiotic resistance.
Influenza virus enters host cells through membrane fusion, a process facilitated by the virus's HA protein. Single-virion measurements of fusion kinetics were previously used to study the molecular mechanism of influenza-virus envelope fusion. Recently, published data on fusion inhibition by antibodies to the 'stem' of influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) enabled researchers to account for inactive HAs in simulations. The research identified three independent functional variables of HA-mediated membrane fusion that are closely linked to neutralization susceptibility. The study provides evidence for compensatory changes in the evolved mechanism and sets the stage for studies aiming to define the molecular constraints on HA evolvability.
The Ret receptor is known to play a role in axon guidance, but its specific function in dendrite development has not been identified until now.  An in vivo RNAi screen in Drosophila class IV dendritic arborization neurons identified Ret as an important regulator of dendrite development.  Specifically, Ret interacts with integrins to regulate dendrite adhesion through rac1.  Dendrite patterning by self-avoidance and tiling is mediated by cell surface receptors and cell adhesion molecules, although many of these receptors and their functions are not fully characterized.  The Drosophila PNS has been an excellent model for identifying molecular mechanisms regulating dendrite development, because of its segmentally repeated dendritic arborization neurons, which all exhibit self-avoidance behavior.  Loss of Ret function in C4da neurons severely affects dendrite coverage, dynamics, growth, and adhesion, resulting in severe dendrite defects due to loss of extracellular matrix adhesion.
Researchers used non-targeted metabolite profiling to analyze the age-associated trajectories of over 15,000 metabolites in Drosophila subjected to control and lifespan-extending diets. They found that aging is associated with increased metabolite diversity and low-abundance molecules, suggesting they include cumulative damage. Additionally, they found that metabolite diversity leveled off in late-life and was linked to survivorship. The study also identified that up-regulation of stress response and repair pathways may promote longevity. Lastly, the analysis provides insights into the activity-driven nature of the aging process.
Researchers at the University of California have suggested that blocking the effects of the protein receptor ALK7 located in fatty tissue may help tackle obesity by preventing fat accumulation. Tests on mice found that knocking out ALK7 led to improved control of lipolysis, which is the process of breaking down of stored lipids, as well as improving the animal's response to high fat diets, leading to a reduction in weight gain. The team are now beginning to work on inhibiting ALK7 in human cells.
Researchers have used the Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics model to analyze the relationship between income and survival rates for children and adults in 180 countries from 1970 to 2007. The study found that while maximum child and adult survival rates increased by around 1% per year, critical income levels needed to achieve half the maximum survival increased for men and decreased for children. Factors contributing to higher critical income levels for adults include HIV infection and smoking. The Michaelis-Menten model was found to be statistically as valid as the Preston logistic and log-linear models, with critical income levels a more useful construct for tracking lateral movements along the income axis.
The development of zebrafish sensory lateral line can be used as a model system to study progenitor cell regulation. In this study, it was found that ErbB/Neuregulin signaling plays a crucial role in postmigratory Schwann cells and negatively regulates lateral line progenitor proliferation, and that activation of Fgf signaling controls sensory organ differentiation, but not progenitor proliferation. Schwann cells maintain interneuromast cells as quiescent progenitors by expressing a yet unidentified Wnt/β-catenin inhibitor. These findings have important implications for understanding how niche-progenitor cells segregate interactions during development and how they may go wrong in disease states.
New research has detailed the process of how accurate cellular proteins are created to ensure correct functionality. In eukaryotic cells the process of building the correct proteins begins with the recognition of the correct start codon, or letter sequence at the beginning of a DNA sequence, which then directs the synthesis of the protein. This recognition process generally takes place by a scanning mechanism that searches through the 5’ untranslated region of the mRNA molecule with the small ribosomal unit for the AUG start codon. Nucleotides surrounding the AUG have a significant impact on selection. Accurate identification of the translation initiation codon is critical. The research details how the Rps5/uS7 protein is crucial for recognition of the correct start codon.
This document describes a method to study the structure and function of membrane proteins using a non-canonical amino acid called azidohomoalanine (AHA). AHA can be incorporated into membrane proteins in place of methionine, and modified with azide-reactive alkyne probes in live cells. This enables site-specific fluorescent labeling to track voltage-dependent conformational changes similar to cysteine-based methods. By combining AHA incorporation and cysteine mutagenesis, the Shaker Kv channel was site-specifically labeled with two different fluorophores simultaneously. This provides a facile and straightforward approach for exploring the structure-function relationships of membrane proteins in live cells using bioorthogonal chemistry.
Agricultural soils are often limited in phosphorus, a macronutrient that is essential for plant growth and development. To maintain crop yields in the face of decreasing phosphate rock reserves, understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in phosphate homeostasis is critical. Researchers investigated the spatio-temporal dynamics of cytosine DNA methylation (mC) in response to phosphate starvation in rice and Arabidopsis. They found that mC was involved in regulating the expression of coding and non-coding genetic elements, but the impact of the phosphate starvation on mC differed between the two plants, suggesting a species-specific mechanism. They identified widespread phosphate-starvation induced changes in mC in rice, leading to the silencing of transposable elements close to highly induced genes. The changes in mC occurred after changes in nearby gene transcription, were mostly independent of DCL3a, and could partially be propagated through mitosis, but no evidence of meiotic transmission was observed. This suggests that TEs in proximity to environmentally-induced genes are silenced via hypermethylation and establishes the temporal hierarchy of transcriptional and epigenomic changes in response to stress.
Researchers have developed an algorithm called Self-Assembling Manifold (SAM) to better select genes in single-cell RNA sequencing that capture biologically meaningful variation. SAM rescales gene expressions and assigns more weight to genes that are spatially variable across the constructed graph to prioritize genes that are variable across the intrinsic manifold of the data. The algorithm has been shown to identify novel stem cell populations of Schistosoma mansoni, a prevalent parasite that infects hundreds of millions of people. SAM consistently outperforms other methods in a variety of biological and quantitative benchmarks. The algorithm offers potential in identifying cell subtypes and quantifying the effects of molecular perturbations in datasets in which the biologically relevant differences between cells are subtle.
This document discusses the results of a study examining substrate-induced conformational changes in the archaeal electroneutral Na+/H+-antiporter, MjNhaP1, which resembles the human antiporter NHE1. The study used electron crystallography of 2D crystals in a range of physiological pH and Na+ conditions. The results showed that changes in Na+ concentration caused a marked conformational change largely independent of pH. Projection difference maps indicated helix movements in the ion translocation site of MjNhaP1, which convert the antiporter from the proton-bound, outward-open state to the Na+-bound, inward-open state, resulting in rapid Na+/H+ antiport. Na+/H+ antiporters are essential in the regulation of intracellular pH, sodium homeostasis, and cell volume, and therefore important drug targets.
The document describes how two RNA viruses, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and Sindbis virus (SINV), are completely restricted in their replication after entry into Lepidopteran cells. Co-infection with vaccinia virus (VACV), a vertebrate DNA virus, can partially overcome this virus restriction, suggesting that VACV encodes factors that promote RNA virus replication. A highly conserved, uncharacterized VACV protein, A51R, is critical for VACV replication in vertebrate cells and for pathogenesis in mice. RNAi screening shows that Lepidopteran RNAi, Nuclear Factor-κB, and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways restrict RNA virus infection. A51R colocalizes with, and stabilizes host microtubules and also associates with ubiquitin. A51R promotes viral protein stability, possibly by preventing ubiquitin-dependent targeting of viral proteins for destruction. The studies reveal new opportunities to study virus-host interactions in experimentally-tractable Lepidopteran systems, and a new model system for studying RNA viruses in Lepidopteran hosts may be useful in the design of new biocontrol agents for pest species and improve understanding of RNA virus-induced disease in vertebrates.
The process of duplicating chromosomes once in each cell cycle produces pairs of sister chromatids that separate accurately at anaphase, but reduplicating chromosomes without separation often produces polytene chromosomes, which can cause mitotic errors and aneuploidy. The mechanisms responding to or resolving polyteny during mitosis are not fully understood. Using Drosophila models, the researchers uncovered two distinct reduplicated chromosome responses: (1) an anaphase delay that prevents tissue malformation and apoptosis and (2) a spindle-independent mechanism termed Separation-Into-Recent-Sisters (SIRS) that separates polytene chromosomes into sister chromatid pairs before metaphase. Both responses require the spindle assembly checkpoint protein Mad2, which regulates mitotic timing. The researchers suggest that understanding how cells adapt the cell cycle machinery to the challenge of segregating polytene chromosomes can help prevent genomic instability and cancer progression.
This study investigated the role of nanos RNA-binding proteins in PGCs development in metazoans. The study found that Nanos proteins promote germ cell fate by downregulating maternal RNAs and proteins that would otherwise interfere with chromatin reprogramming in PGCs. PGCs lacking nanos activity failed to silence hundreds of transcripts normally expressed in oocytes due to delayed turnover of maternal transcripts and inappropriate transcriptional activation. The latter appeared to be an indirect consequence of delayed turnover of the maternally-inherited transcription factor LIN-15B, which is known to antagonize PRC2 activity. The study also found that MES-dependent activation of germline genes is antagonized in somatic lineages by a group of transcriptional regulators, which include components of the DRM class of transcriptional regulators and LIN-15B. Competition between the MES chromatin modifiers and the DRM/LIN-15B transcription factors balance the transcription of somatic and germline genes in somatic and germline tissues. The study suggests that Nanos plays a significant role in regulating germ cell fate by downregulating maternal RNAs and proteins and establishing MES dominance in PGCs.
The document discusses the challenges of mapping the genotype-phenotype-fitness relationship in evolutionary biology, particularly in identifying which phenotypes are affected by adaptive mutations and how they contribute to fitness. The authors propose a new approach that involves comparing how the fitness effects of many mutations change across a large number of environments. They use this approach to model the genotype-phenotype-fitness relationship for hundreds of adaptive yeast mutants and find that adaptive mutations are locally modular and globally pleiotropic. This suggests that adaptive mutations contain substantial latent phenotypic diversity that may respond differently to future challenges. The approach is promising for investigating the phenotypic and fitness consequences of mutation.
Fructophily, the preference for fructose over other carbon sources, has been shown to be linked to a wider remodeling of central carbon metabolism and the acquisition of bacterial genes in a yeast lineage. This adaptation to sugar-rich environments involved the acquisition of an enzyme required for sucrose assimilation from bacteria and reinstatement of alcoholic fermentation through either the horizontal acquisition of homologous bacterial genes or modification of a pre-existing yeast gene. Fructophily has also been identified in fructophilic lactic acid bacteria and is associated with redox homeostasis. The acquisition of new genetic traits by horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is believed to have played a crucial role in the domestication and evolution of metabolism in fungi, particularly in fructophilic yeasts. The work highlights the importance of comparative genomics in discovering links between phenotypes and genotypes within an evolutionary framework.
Researchers have shown that estrogen and progesterone hormones control melanin synthesis in skin, providing a possible new class of therapies for skin pigmentation disorders. The team of scientists also identified two membrane-bound, steroid hormone receptors that are responsible for regulating melanin synthesis: the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) and progestin and adipoQ receptor 7 (PAQR7). The discovery is particularly interesting given that normal human melanocytes lack classical estrogen or progesterone receptors. Levels of melanin in female skin increases during pregnancy but the molecular mechanisms have not been understood until now.
Researchers have developed a new technique to monitor whole-brain neural activity in freely swimming larval zebrafish, according to a paper in Nature Methods. The novel volume imaging and 3D tracking method allows scientists to record neural activity during visually evoked and prey capture behaviours in the animals. Despite previous research into head-fixed larval zebrafish, there were challenges in imaging a speeding brain, so the new imaging and tracking system was used to monitor fish movement, which can reach instantaneous velocities of up to 50 mm/s, and acceleration of 1 g. The team demonstrated the ability of the system during prey capture behaviour in the fish.
The Metzincin metalloprotease ADAM10 plays a key role in ectodomain shedding, a process that controls the length of cell surface membrane proteins, mod
The document discusses the role of protein concentration gradients, specifically Pom1 kinase, in regulating cell growth and division in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe yeast. Through imaging methods, researchers found that Pom1 kinase forms gradients at cell poles that control the timing of mitotic entry by inhibiting Cdr2, which forms stable membrane-associated nodes at mid-cell. Pom1 gradients rely on membrane association and lateral diffusion modulated by clustering. The researchers propose that individual Pom1 molecules exchange within longer-lived clusters forming the functional gradient unit. An allelic series blocking auto-phosphorylation shows that multi-phosphorylation shapes and buffers the gradient to control mid-cell levels. TIRF imaging of this cortical pool demonstrates more Pom1 overlaps with Cdr2 in short than long cells, consistent with Pom1 inhibition of Cdr2 decreasing with cell growth.
Singlet oxygen is a toxic byproduct of oxygenic photosynthesis that can cause damage to cells. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii acclimates to singlet oxygen, but the retrograde signaling pathway mediating this response in the algae is unclear. A mutant called singlet oxygen acclimation knocked-out 1 (sak1), which lacks the acclimation response to singlet oxygen, has been identified, and analysis of genome-wide changes in RNA abundance during acclimation to singlet oxygen has revealed that SAK1 is a key regulator of the gene expression response during acclimation. The SAK1 gene encodes an uncharacterized protein with a domain conserved among chlorophytes and present in some bZIP transcription factors. The SAK1 protein is located in the cytosol and is induced and phosphorylated upon exposure to singlet oxygen. The mutant sak1 exhibited wild-type resistance to various photosynthetic inhibitors and generators of other reactive oxygen species (ROS), suggesting its defect is specific to singlet oxygen. RNA sequencing identified the cellular processes and genes involved in singlet oxygen acclimation, including the genes Cre13.g566850.t1.1 and Cre06.g263550.t1.1, and examined the induction of H2O2-responsive genes (e.g. VTC2 and DHAR1) during singlet oxygen acclimation.
Archaeal histones form nucleosome-like complexes called archaeasomes that wrap between 60 and 500 base pairs of DNA. This study uses molecular dynamics simulations and cryo-electron microscopy to characterize the solution state of archaeasomes on longer DNA. Results show that archaeasomes can expand without disrupting histone-DNA or histone-histone interactions. Cryo-EM structures reveal that DNA is wrapped in consecutive substates arranged 90 degrees out-of-plane with one another. The dynamics of archaeasomes stand in contrast to the stability of eukaryotic nucleosomes, and this study suggests that archaea may utilize the inherent stochastic behavior of archaeasomes to access their DNA.
Researchers have described a human cell surface receptor that utilises both ligand binding and force to trigger a chemical process that controls the adhesive properties of the receptor. The protein, ERp5, mediates the release of fibrinogen from activated platelet αIIbβ3 integrin via cleavage of the receptor's βI-domain Cys177-Cys184 disulfide bond. Further tests indicated that the cleavage is enhanced by mechanical force. This coupling of mechanical force, ligand binding and redox events to control cell adhesion could be used to regulate other protein-protein interactions. The researchers suggest that insights gained from their study could be used to develop new treatments for conditions such as cancer, auto-immune conditions and vascular thrombosis, which involve the dysregulation of integrins.
J-proteins play a crucial role in selecting substrates for Hsp70 in protein folding and disaggregation. The emergence of a eukaryote-specific signature for interclass complexation of canonical J-proteins has been discovered, which correlates with cooperative action in disaggregation. The study shows that the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition allowed for increased fine-tuning and broadening of Hsp70 function in eukaryotes through J-protein networking. The signature alterations exclude some J-proteins from networking, ensuring functional network integrity and J-protein specialization. The study investigated the molecular basis for J-protein networking and its evolution. By comparison of structural features of JD and CTD domains of canonical J-proteins across kingdoms of life, the study observed a high degree of conservation in electrostatic potentials at the proposed JD and CTD contact faces within each of the classes of the eukaryotic J-proteins. 
The assembly of the preinitiation complex (PIC) occurs upstream of the +1 nucleosome in yeast, obstructing the transcription start site and often assembled with the histone variant H2A.Z. Conditional mutants were used to block PIC assembly to understand the contribution of the transcription machinery in the disassembly of the +1 H2A.Z nucleosome. Blocking PIC assembly resulted in promoter-specific H2A.Z accumulation, indicating that the PIC is required to evict H2A.Z. Robust PIC-dependent H2A.Z eviction was observed at active and infrequently transcribed genes, providing a new metric for identifying cryptic and alternative sites of initiation. The incorporation of H2A.Z into nucleosomes is catalyzed by the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex SWR1. H2A.Z nucleosomes are predisposed for disassembly to allow for a rapid transcriptional response. The transcription machinery is a major driving force of the disassembly of the +1 H2A.Z nucleosomes.
A study has shown how attention changes the way sensory neurons in the brain process information. By developing a functional model of population activity, researchers have identified four separate time-varying modulatory signals, two of which target task-relevant neurons in one hemisphere. Under directed spatial attention, the associated shared modulatory signal decreases in variance, providing an explanation for previous observations that attention reduces variability and noise correlations of sensory neurons. These changes account for the previously-reported decrease in neural variability and noise correlations. The inferred modulatory signals are also correlated with the monkey’s behavioral performance on each trial and are influenced by previous rewards.
The thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) riboswitch is a regulatory element in mRNA that can modify gene expression according to TPP concentration. The specificity of the riboswitch depends on conformational changes that take place within its aptamer domain. Researchers used a combined force spectroscopy and Förster resonance energy transfer (smFRET) approach to study the role of tertiary interactions in ligand binding at the single-molecule level. The approach directly probes secondary and tertiary structural changes during folding, including events associated with binding. The team found that weaker binding states can bind to TPP but are unable to form a tertiary docking interaction to complete the binding process. Long-range tertiary interactions stabilize global riboswitch structure and confer increased ligand specificity.
A survey has found that most experts in the field believe there is a lack of convincing evidence that humans can “perceive unconsciously” for weak stimuli presented briefly and masked. The study used a bias-free experimental procedure for subjective introspection and found no evidence for unconscious perception. The results suggest that subjective awareness and objective discrimination thresholds are effectively the same so that if performance is above chance, there is conscious experience. The study sheds light on methodological issues for studying unconscious perception and provides a platform for future research. The findings are explained in detail in two behavioral experiments that used a recently developed confidence rating method. The results showed no evidence of “performance without awareness” but did suggest stronger “performance > awareness,” likely an inherent feature of the 2IFC nature of the confidence task.
Researchers have identified instances of independent plasmid transfer between nosocomial pathogens, according to a study in eLife. Using long-read sequencing to analyse genomes of 2,173 bacterial isolates from infections in a single hospital over 18 months, they discovered identical nucleotide regions in bacteria of different genera, showing the transfer of mobile genetic elements (MGEs) to facilitate the spread of antibiotic resistance, virulence and environmental persistence genes between drug-resistant pathogens. The research showed the shared sequences mostly occurred in Enterobacteriaceae, particularly Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp and Citrobacter spp. Plasmids were found to occur in isolates in both the same and different species and were carried on a variety of different plasmid and chromosomal MGEs, and co-occurred in different orders, orientations and combinations. The research could help inform efforts to limit the spread of drug-resistant pathogens in hospitals.
Researchers have identified a gene responsible for transporting histamine metabolites into photoreceptor neurons and contributing to the histamine-carcinine cycle responsible for maintaining visual neurotransmission. The gene identified, called carT, is required for visual signal transduction and phototactic behavior. Carcinine, which is converted from histamine by glia, accumulates in carT flies, and wild-type levels are restored by photoreceptor-specific expression of CarT.  Defects in histaminergic signaling have been linked to multiple neurodegenerative diseases, depression, and Tourette’s syndrome. The histamine-carcinine cycle is necessary to maintain visual neurotransmission.
Loss of Foxc1 is a cause of Dandy-Walker malformation, which is the most common human cerebellar malformation characterized by cerebellar hypoplasia and an enlarged posterior fossa and fourth ventricle. Foxc1 is expressed in the mouse posterior fossa mesenchyme and loss of Foxc1 induces a decrease in embryonic cerebellar ventricular zone radial glial proliferation and an increase in cerebellar neuronal differentiation. Migration of cerebellar neurons is disrupted and associated with disordered radial glial morphology. SDF1α, a direct Foxc1 target also expressed in the head mesenchyme, acts as a cerebellar radial glial mitogen and a chemoattractant for nascent Purkinje cells. Its receptor, Cxcr4, is expressed in cerebellar radial glial cells and conditional Cxcr4 ablation with Nes-Cre mimics the Foxc1-/- cerebellar phenotype. SDF1α also rescues the Foxc1-/- phenotype. The head mesenchyme exerts a considerable influence on early embryonic brain development and its disruption contributes to neurodevelopmental disorders in humans.
The protein p27Kip1 (p27) functions as a cyclin-CDK inhibitor and is a negative regulator of cell proliferation. It also controls other cellular processes, including migration, and can act as an oncogene. Researchers have found that p27 promotes cell invasion by binding to and regulating the activity of Cortactin, a critical regulator of invadopodia formation. P27 localizes to invadopodia and limits their number and activity. The researchers found that p27 promotes the interaction of Cortactin with PAK1, which in turn promotes invadopodia turnover by phosphorylating Cortactin. The p27-Cortactin pathway promotes cell invasion by facilitating invadopodia turnover via Rac1/PAK1/Cortactin. P27 is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of multiple cellular processes. While the role of p27 in the regulation of cell migration is firmly established, how p27 is targeted to specific locations in the cytoplasm to control motility and invasion remains unclear. Researchers have identified a novel mechanism by which p27 directly controls cell invasion that could contribute to the increased invasive and metastatic capacity of tumors where p27 is mislocalized in the cytoplasm. The researchers found that p27 binds to Cortactin and localizes to invadopodia following serum or growth factor stimulation and promotes cell invasion. P27-null cells have more invadopodia and degrade gelatin more efficiently, but exhibit impaired invasive capacity. Researchers found that p27 promotes the recruitment of PAK1 to Cortactin and invadopodia turnover and this is dependent on phosphorylation of S113/S150/S282 of Cortactin, the sites targeted by PAK kinases.
The impact of phage predation on bacterial pathogens in relation to human disease is not fully understood. However, a recent study shows that predatory interactions between a specific phage and Vibrio cholerae, a bacteria responsible for causing cholera, can modulate the evolutionary trajectory of the pathogen within individuals during the natural course of infection. The study investigated cholera patient stool samples from Haiti and Bangladesh and found that phage predation can drive the genomic diversity of intra-patient V. cholerae populations. The research also showed that phage predation can significantly alter the virulence potential of V. cholerae. Traditional views of host-pathogen interactions are being challenged with a growing appreciation of the influence of the host's microbial ecosystem on these interactions.
Researchers have identified a mechanism by which bacteria can transfer outer membrane proteins and lipids between cells to regulate cell signaling and multicellular behavior. The transfer process was found to occur via transient cell-to-cell contacts and was associated with the formation of dynamic outer membrane tubes. This mechanism is thought to play an important role in regulating the social behaviors of Myxococcus xanthus, a gram-negative deltaproteobacterium that displays complex multicellular behaviors in response to environmental cues. The research sheds light on the mechanisms by which bacteria coordinate their behavior and paves the way for future studies into the molecular details of intercellular communication in bacteria.
Researchers have developed an assay using laser ablation to directly probe the nucleation of microtubules in Xenopus laevis egg extracts, finding that the size of a structure is controlled by autocatalytic growth of microtubules, stimulated by microtubule-stimulated nucleation. The autocatalytic activity of microtubule nucleation is spatially regulated by the limiting amounts of active microtubule nucleators which decrease with distance from the chromosomes. The mechanism provides an upper limit to spindle size. The study suggests that the limiting pool of active nucleators is the limiting component for both autocatalytic growth and size regulation.
A study has found a link between human intelligence and the structural and physiological properties of neurons in the brain, specifically larger and more complex dendrites on pyramidal neurons in the temporal cortex. The research found that larger dendritic trees enable pyramidal neurons to track activity of synaptic inputs with higher temporal precision, which allows for efficient information transfer from inputs to output within cortical neurons. The study used a unique multimodal data set from 46 human subjects containing single cell physiology and biocytin-labelled temporal cortical pyramidal neurons to test their hypothesis that variation in neuronal morphology can lead to functional differences in action potential speed and information transfer and explain variation in IQ scores. The study concludes that larger and more complex pyramidal neurons in the temporal association area may partly contribute to a thicker cortex and link to higher intelligence.
Primary dystonia, a neuromuscular disease, is caused by a glutamate deletion (ΔE) at position 302/303 of TorsinA, a poorly understood AAA+ ATPase that resides in the endoplasmic reticulum. The ΔE mutation diminishes the binding of two TorsinA ATPase activators, LAP1 and LULL1. These mutations are at the root of primary dystonia, an incurable disease. However, researchers have recently found a nanobody that stabilizes TorsinAΔE-LULL1 interactions, which enabled the solving of its structure at 1.4 Å. A comparison of these structures shows the differences in activator interactions that separate healthy and diseased states in atomic detail, providing a potential structural platform for drug development, as the development of a small molecule that rescues TorsinAΔE could serve as a cure for primary dystonia.
Researchers have discovered a novel mechanism for regulating Treg cells in immune homeostasis using chemical biology. The dual specificity tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase DYRK1A was identified as a key player in regulating the balance between Treg cells and Th17 cells, and inhibition of DYRK1A was found to enhance Treg differentiation and impair Th17 differentiation. The compound harmine, which inhibits DYRK1A, was found to promote the formation of Treg cells and suppress Th17 cells in multiple experimental models of mucosal inflammation and systemic autoimmunity. The study highlights the importance of identifying novel pathways for Treg cell differentiation and suggests the potential for DYRK inhibitors as a therapy for inflammatory diseases.
Protocadherins are cell adhesion molecules essential for the development of the nervous system and have links to neurodevelopmental disorders. Mutations in the protocadherin-19 (PCDH19) gene result in a female-limited, infant-onset form of epilepsy, and over 100 mutations in PCDH19 have been identified in epilepsy patients. The specific role of PCDH19 and other protocadherins in neural development are only beginning to be revealed. A crystallographic structure of the minimal adhesive fragment of the zebrafish Pcdh19 extracellular domain was presented, and it reveals the adhesive interface for Pcdh19, which is broadly relevant to both non-clustered δ and clustered protocadherin subfamilies. This interface involves fully overlapping extracellular cadherin (EC)1 to EC4 domains and likely represents a general interaction mechanism for the non-clustered δ-protocadherins. There are 51 PCDH19 missense mutations that can be mapped to 43 locations in the Pcdh19 EC1-4 structure, affecting its function either directly or allosterically, or by altering the strength of cell-cell adhesion due to a reduced number of functional molecules on the cell surface.
The study of plant pathogen interactions is important for research-driven pest control, but it remains challenging as both the host and pathogen need to be fully genetically accessible organisms. A new biotrophic model pathosystem, Ustilago bromivora and Brachypodium sp, has been established including an annotated fungal genome and methods for genetic manipulation of the fungus and its host plant. The research on the fungal life cycle revealed a mating type bias phenomenon that strongly promotes inbreeding and could be a potential speciation driver. The establishment of the U. bromivora-Brachypodium system as a novel plant-pathogen model to study biotrophic interactions is valuable as both the plant and pathogen are more genetically accessible.
A bioinformatics pipeline called Cenote-Taker was developed to automatically annotate over 2500 complete genomes belonging to dozens of established and emerging viral families, including over 600 circular sequences that lack discernable similarity to known viruses. The genomes were derived from over 70 animal samples ranging from nematodes to human tissue specimens. The data allows for high throughput documentation of the virosphere and contributes to the understanding of viral sequence diversity. The research team also attempted to find possible associations between viruses and degenerative brain diseases, but no novel complete viral genomes were recovered from brain tissue samples. However, the presence of known viral DNA sequences in some samples made it difficult to interpret the negative data.
The dorsal/ventral patterning of sea urchin embryos relies on the Nodal gene, which is expressed by a ventrally-localized organizer. However, the mechanisms causing the symmetry-breaking are not yet fully understood. The Hbox12 homeodomain-containing repressor is expressed by prospective dorsal cells in the Paracentrotus Lividus, facing and preceding the onset of nodal transcription. Hbox12 is a key upstream gene in the sequence of events involved in the symmetry-breaking of sea urchin embryos. Hbox 12 allows ectopic expression of nodal, and clonal loss-of-function by blastomere transplantation or gene-transfer assay indicates that dorsal polarization requires Hbox12 action in dorsal cells. The knock-down of nodal restores DV polarity of embryos lacking Hbox12 function. Finally, hbox12 is a dorsal-specific negative modulator of the p38-MAPK activity, which is required for nodal expression.
Researchers have uncovered the structure of mammalian circadian clock protein PER2 bound to a cryptochrome protein, which could be a key to understanding how the 24-hour body clock works. The structure reveals that the two proteins wrap around each other like a belt and stabilise one another. The researchers say it provides a molecular explanation for the clock's dependence on the two proteins working together, which could help produce new treatments for sleep disorders or jet lag.
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) conduct transport between the nucleus and cytoplasm while keeping their contents separated. The NPC barrier relies primarily on the intrinsically disordered FG domain of Nup98. FG domains are multivalent and often contain hundreds of FG motifs. The cohesive interactions between FG repeats represent a sieve-like FG hydrogel, whose mesh size sets an upper size limit for a passive NPC passage. Facilitated translocation speeds up the passage of translocating species by NTR-mediated melting of obstructing meshes. The exact mechanism behind this paradoxical acceleration is still under investigation. However, several solutions have been proposed, including the 'virtual gate' model, which regards FG domains as entropic brushes that repel inert material while NTRs overcome this entropic barrier by binding to them. The selective phase model assumes that the cohesive interactions between FG repeats cross-link them into a sieve-like FG hydrogel. Several lines of evidence support this model. The FG particles exclude inert macromolecules but allow efficient NTR entry at rates mostly limited by mass transport within the surrounding buffer. The simplest explanation for these parallels is that the actual NPC barrier is formed by such phase-separated FG hydrogel material.
New research into alternative splicing (AS) - a critical step of gene regulation that significantly expands proteomic diversity - has identified a large program of CLK1-regulated periodic AS intimately associated with cell cycle control. The analysis of over 2.3 billion RNA-seq reads showed that more than 90% of human genes underwent AS and a substantial fraction of the resulting isoforms are thought to have distinct functions. CLK1 is a Serine-Arginine rich proteins (SR) protein kinase, and the periodic AS events involve genes that are significantly enriched in functions linked to cell cycle control, yet they do not significantly overlap genes subject to periodic changes in steady-state transcript levels.

In this document, researchers investigate the evolution of multicellularity using an evolutionary model where cells search for resources by chemotaxis in a changing environment. The study shows that multicellular aggregates evolve because they perform chemotaxis more efficiently than single cells. The emergence of collective behavior can be a driving factor for undifferentiated multicellularity. The study uses the Cellular Potts Model to study collective cell movement as an emergent driver of multicellularity during evolution. The study finds that individual cells follow the chemotactic signal very inefficiently, but cells that adhere to each other within groups transfer information about the gradient in a self-organized manner, allowing for efficient chemotaxis. The researchers conclude that individual contributions to cluster chemotaxis are not simply averaged and that streaming is an important behavior in the self-organization of cells in multicellular aggregates.
In order to discover new components of the TP53 pathway, a screening was performed for genes whose loss-of-function debilitated TP53 signaling and enabled oncogenic transformation of human mammary epithelial cells. The screening identified transglutaminase 2 (TGM2) as a putative tumor suppressor in the TP53 pathway. TGM2 suppressed colony formation in soft agar and tumor formation in a xenograft mouse model. The depletion of growth supplements induced both TGM2 expression and autophagy in a TP53-dependent manner. TGM2 promoted autophagic flux by enhancing autophagic protein degradation and autolysosome clearance. Reduced expression of both CDKN1A, which regulates the cell cycle downstream of TP53, and TGM2 synergized to promote oncogenic transformation. The study shows that TGM2-mediated autophagy and CDKN1A-mediated cell cycle arrest are two important barriers in the TP53 pathway that prevent oncogenic transformation.
The Nramp family of transporters are found in organisms from bacteria to humans and enable the uptake of essential divalent transition metals and protons through an alternating-access mechanism. The authors present high-resolution structures of Deinococcus radiodurans (Dra) Nramp in multiple conformations to provide a detailed description of the Nramp transport cycle, identifying key intramolecular rearrangements and changes to the metal coordination sphere. The authors propose a model in which both metal and protons enter the transporter via the same external pathway to the binding site but follow separate routes to the cytoplasm, which could facilitate the co-transport of two cationic species. The authors demonstrate novel modes of conformational rearrangement and ion shuttling in DraNramp compared to other LeuT-fold transporters, thus expanding the known repertoire of intramolecular dynamics and substrate transport mechanisms possible within this important protein family. The study provides insight into the thermodynamically coupled secondary transport of metal and proton substrates by Nramp, and its high-resolution structures suggest a novel mechanism of proton transport in the outward-locked state of the transporter.
Scientists have discovered a fossil of a bizarre aquatic insect larva from the Middle Jurassic epoch of China that provides compelling evidence of ectoparasitism, the first known aquatic example. The larva has six radial ridges positioned around a sucker that might have been used to penetrate the scales of salamanders in order to feed on their blood. The group of insects which the larva, Qiyia jurassica, belongs to, are called athericids and are only distantly related to any group of flies living today. The specimen, described in the journal eLife, is a complete outlier among known insect larvae and could represent an otherwise unrecorded method of feeding as well as providing important clues about the ancient fauna of lakes and rivers.
Researchers have developed a new sequencing-based protein interaction assay, called deepPCA, which quantifies the effects of over 120,000 pairs of point mutations on the formation of the AP-1 transcription factor complex between the products of the FOS and JUN proto-oncogenes. deepPCA uses deep sequencing to quantify the effects on a PPI of thousands of combinations of point mutations within one or both physically interacting proteins. The results show how physical interactions generate quantitatively predictable genetic interactions. Mutations often have outcomes that change depending on additional genetic variation carried by an individual, making their effects difficult to predict.
Researchers have used the collaborative cross (CC), a set of mouse strains designed to discover genes for complex diseases, to study genetic variations contributing to susceptibility and resistance to melanoma. They identified two genes linked to rapid onset of spontaneous and UV-induced melanoma, Prkdc and Rrp15 respectively. The study suggests that events occurring shortly after UV exposure, such as dysregulation of ribosome function, could be important in melanoma susceptibility. The study also emphasises the complexity of the genetic and environmental interactions underlying melanoma risk.
The total number of vertebrae in vertebrates is precisely defined and derived from embryonic somites continuously produced during body formation. The activation of posterior Hox genes in the chicken embryo seems to correlate with the slowing down of axis elongation. A subset of progressively more posterior Hox genes is progressively activated, becoming expressed in domains whose anterior boundaries along the body axis reflect their position in the clusters. These genes repress Wnt activity with increasing strength, leading to a graded repression of the Brachyury/T transcription factor, reducing mesoderm ingression, and slowing down the elongation process. Due to the continuation of somite formation, this mechanism leads to the progressive reduction of PSM size, ultimately bringing the retinoic acid (RA)-producing segmented region in close vicinity to the tail bud, accounting for the termination of segmentation and axis elongation.
The study investigates how internal goals guide movements in addition to external stimuli. The basal ganglia are known to be involved in motor control by modulating inhibition on competing downstream motor structures. The study uses mice to examine whether the basal ganglia mediate the influence of internal goals, like value, on movement selection. The findings suggest that internally-specified movements may be promoted over stimulus-guided movements by basal ganglia processing. A new task for mice that dissociated equally rewarded internally-specified and stimulus-guided movements was designed to test how each engaged the basal ganglia. Activity in the substantia nigra pars reticulata, a basal ganglia output, was found to predictably differ preceding internally-specified and stimulus-guided movements. The experiment suggested that BG integrates internal goals, other than value, and that internally-specified movements are facilitated over stimulus-guided movements via BG processing.
The study presents a new method called Tetbow, which improves the existing Brainbow method for multicolor labeling of neurons for imaging purposes. They used the tetracycline-operator system to optimize plasmid or virus vector-mediated labeling, resulting in enhanced expression levels that facilitate light-microscopy-based neuronal tracing at high resolution. They also developed a Tetbow system with chemical tags, expanding the repertoire of the fluorescence labels and applications. Tetbow was used to visualize the three-dimensional architecture of individual neurons, and axonal projection patterns of individual mitral/tufted cells along several millimeters in the mouse olfactory system. The study provides a proof-of-concept for the viability of Tetbow as a powerful tool for tracing neuronal circuits at higher densities and resolutions.
The article discusses the neural circuits underlying partially reinforced fear (PRF) in mice, which occurs when an aversive event is only associated with a conditioning stimulus (CS) on some occasions. The study found that PRF conditioning resulted in lower tone-elicited freezing compared to fully reinforced fear (FRF) conditioning. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) were identified as key brain regions involved in PRF. Chemogenetic inhibition of BNST-projecting mPFC neurons increased PRF freezing, suggesting that mPFC->BNST neurons limit fear to threats with a history of partial association with an aversive stimulus. The study has potential implications for understanding the neural basis of trauma-related disorders.
This document discusses the mechanisms by which kinesins, a family of microtubule-based ATP-powered motors, generate force and undertake essential cellular functions. The authors used cryo-electron microscopy to visualize microtubule-bound kinesin-1 and kinesin-3 motor domains in different ATPase cycles, addressing the question of how microtubule binding stimulates their ATPase and controls force generation. The authors found that microtubule binding promotes ordered conformations of conserved loops that stimulate ADP release, enhance microtubule affinity, and prime the catalytic site for ATP binding. The authors also compared the mechanochemical features of two different transport kinesins, a kinesin-1 and a kinesin-3, and identified attributes that confer distinctive properties on each motor.
Resveratrol, a compound found in certain foods, has been shown to have beneficial effects on aging, inflammation, and metabolism. It achieves this by activating the lysine deacetylase, sirtuin 1, the cAMP pathway, or AMP-activated protein kinase. Resveratrol also acts as a pathway-selective estrogen receptor-alpha (ERα) ligand to modulate the inflammatory response but not cell proliferation. The compound possesses anti-inflammatory effects and can suppress Interleukin-6 transcription, and these characteristics are linked to the estrogen receptor-alpha. The anti-inflammatory actions of resveratrol require dissection of its ER-mediated versus non-ER-mediated effects and ERα's interplay with SIRT1. Resveratrol represses inflammatory genes through ERα, which is recruited to the promoter where it alters the recruitment profile of co-regulators, including SIRT1, and reduces acetylation of p65 NF-κB, which is required for transcriptional activation.
The transmembrane domains (TMDs) of SNARE proteins play an active role in membrane fusion, according to research led by the University of Bonn. The team showed structural flexibility of the TMD in vesicle protein synaptobrevin-2 is essential for Ca2+-triggered exocytosis and actively promotes membrane fusion and fusion pore expansion. Replacing the TMD with helix-stabilising leucine residues spanning the vesicle's outer leaflet strongly impaired exocytosis by reducing the size of the rapidly releasable pool (RRP) and the slowly releasable pool (SRP). Conversely, increasing the number of helix-destabilising beta-branched valine or isoleucine residues accelerated fusion pore expansion beyond wildtype levels.
Orphan genes are those restricted to a single phylogenetic lineage and are subject to high rates of emergence but also rapid loss, making the number of genes surprisingly constant through evolution. The phenomenon has been mainly analyzed over long evolutionary time scales and orphan loss has remained unexplored. This study shows orphan gene emergence is high, however, recently emerged orphans are more likely to be lost than older ones. Highly expressed orphans with a male bias are also more likely to be retained. There is a proposition that orphan loss is not caused by high rates of sequence evolution but reflects specific evolutionary constraints. Orphans are genes with limited phylogenetic distribution that make up up to 30% of the gene catalog in all sequenced genomes.
The study investigates the redundancy of neural activity patterns in motor control and the principles that guide the selection of these patterns. The study used a brain-computer interface to define precisely which neural population activity patterns were redundant. The study found that the distributions of redundant neural activity and task-relevant activity were coupled, which enabled accurate predictions of the distributions of redundant activity. This suggests limits on the extent to which redundancy may be exploited by the brain for computation. The study also highlighted the differences between neural redundancy and muscular redundancy in motor control. The study tested hypotheses based on minimum energy principles and found that subjects do not necessarily select the population activity pattern that requires the fewest spikes. Instead, the distribution of output-null activity is constrained by the corresponding output-potent activity.
A study conducted at Boston Children's Hospital has found a mechanism to keep hematopoietic stem cells in place for longer in the meandering aortic trunk. Hematopoietic stem cells are cells that give rise to all types of blood cells. This increased lifespan is in a way 'epigenetic', meaning that it modifies genes without changing their underlying DNA sequence, but rather via an enzyme in the body called DNA methyltransferase 3bb.1 (DNMT3BB.1), which keeps particular genes activated, including that of a key transcription factor called c-Myb. DNMT3BB.1 acts as one of the factors contributing to the initial formation of hematopoietic stem cells in the dorsal aorta of the developing embryo, yet this is giving a much greater lifespan to these cells, ensuring that the cells that will go on to populate the entire blood and immune system of the organism will persist long-term, with important implications for blood diseases, transplantation and stem cell research.
Yeast cells rely on the signalling pathway mediated by TOR Complex 2 (TORC2) and Ypk1 protein kinase to maintain plasma membrane lipid composition during growth and environmental insult. This pathway allows cells to cope with stresses put on the plasma membrane by altering the levels and distributions of lipids to prevent accumulation of intermediates that trigger autophagy. Researchers used a three-tiered genome-wide screen to identify additional Ypk1 substrates and found both catalytic subunits of the ceramide synthase complex. This discovery sheds light on how TORC2-initiated signalling regulates flux through the sphingolipid pathway and offers insight into the importance of this control mechanism for survival when sphingolipid synthesis is compromised.
This study investigated the mechanism of asynchronous transmission, a type of synaptic transmission that is not well understood. The study used live imaging and patch clamp recording to explore spatially distinct calcium sources that contribute to asynchronous release in the zebrafish neuromuscular synapse. The study found that synchronous release is tied to presynaptic calcium channels, whereas asynchronous release is boosted by a propagating intracellular calcium source initiated at off-synaptic locations. These findings suggest that a secondary calcium source is responsible for the persistence of asynchronous release following termination of the stimulus, and that this source may be common among synapses with prominent asynchronous release. The study also showed that ω-conotoxin GVIA, which blocks P/Q-type calcium channels, fully inhibited synchronous release but did not affect asynchronous release, which was still present, but with a greatly delayed onset compared to control fish. Fluorescence imaging also confirmed the delayed onset of asynchronous release in ω-conotoxin GVIA-treated fish.
Researchers have discovered how a single cellular parasite responsible for African sleeping sickness has been able to evolve rapidly within a single species. By analysing the genome of the Trypanosoma brucei gambiense parasite, scientists have discovered that the organism reproduces strictly asexually, leading to homologous chromosomes accumulating mutations independently of each other. The result is the Meselson effect, where the organism is able to compensate for deleterious mutations between generations by evolving independently of its ancestors. The researchers argue that the findings could have implications for our understanding of how other pathogens adapt to new hosts.
Superelongation complexes (SECs) are vital for transcription elongation of many human genes, including the HIV-1 genome. The viral Tat protein binds to the nascent TAR RNA and the CycT1 subunit of the P-TEFb kinase in an SEC at the HIV-1 promoter. To understand the preferential recruitment of SECs by Tat and TAR, the crystal structure of a quaternary complex containing Tat, P-TEFb, and the SEC scaffold, AFF4 was determined. Tata and AFF4 fold on the surface of CycT1 and interact directly. Interface mutations in the AFF4 homolog AFF1 reduced Tat-AFF1 affinity in vivo and Tat-dependent transcription from the HIV promoter. AFF4 binding in the presence of Tat partially orders the CycT1 Tat-TAR recognition motif and increases the affinity of Tat-P-TEFb for TAR 30-fold. These studies indicate that AFF4 acts as a two-step filter to increase the selectivity of Tat and TAR for SECs over P-TEFb alone.
Fossil evidence of extinct organisms’ behaviors is rare, but a new finding in mid-Cretaceous Burmese amber shows the earliest convincing direct evidence of a specific behavior. The fossil belongs to an ensign scale insect species called Wathondara kotejai, which has eggs preserved within a wax ovisac and six freshly hatched nymphs. This represents the first direct evidence of brood care in the insect fossil record, and is a remarkably conserved egg-brooding reproductive strategy within scale insects in stasis for nearly 100 million years. Fossil evidence of brood care is rare, with only two other examples found in Mesozoic insects. In addition to describing the insect, the study explains how brood care promotes the survival of the next generation, and represents a breakthrough in the adaptation of organisms to their environment.
A new in vitro force-gliding assay has shown that multiple mammalian kinesin-1 work together to induce tension and provide smooth cargo motion within the crowded surroundings of a cell. Kinesins can adopt two different states, with one-third of motors resisting movement and two-thirds speeding it up, leading to an asymmetric tug-of-war. The ability of multiple kinesins to cooperate and overcome roadblocks is crucial for uninterrupted cargo transport inside the cell. The study found that an asymmetric tug-of-war, negative cooperativity, and additive forces define collective kinesin transport. This research provides insights into multiple-motor behaviour and can help understand how various molecular motors work together within cells.
The effector enzyme adenylyl cyclase type 5 (AC5) produces the second messenger cAMP upon receptor-mediated activation by G protein Golf in the striatum, which is critical for motor control. In this study, it was found that AC5 exists in a stable pre-coupled complex with subunits of the Golf heterotrimer, and this complex is mediated by the phosducin-like protein 1 (PhLP1) chaperone. Eliminating PhLP1 affects the assembly and stability of the complex and causes selective impairment in sensorimotor behavior and motor skill learning. These findings provide evidence for the existence of stable G protein-effector signaling complexes and identify a new component essential for their assembly.
The role of the Na+/K+ pump current in regulating the bursting activity of neurons and networks controlling motor output has not been well studied. The Na+/K+ pump maintains intracellular concentrations of Na+ and K+ but its electrogenic activity can generate a current that regulates the bursting activity of neurons and networks. Research using leeches found that stimulating the pump with monensin decreased the period of oscillator heart interneurons, which participate in half-center oscillators to pace the heartbeat central pattern generator. This effect was prevented or reversed when the h-current was blocked. The biophysical model developed supported these findings. The study shows that in the presence of the h-current, the electrogenic activity of the pump can play a significant role in the dynamics of bursting activity in the leech heartbeat central pattern generator and likely in other rhythmically bursting neuronal networks.
A study analyzed transcriptomic data from muscles of ALS patients and mouse models to investigate the mechanisms of muscle atrophy. The study found that p53 deregulation was a common factor in muscle atrophy and identified a correlation between the severity of muscle atrophy in ALS patients and mice and the levels of p53 family target genes. The study also found increased p63 protein levels in the fibers of atrophic muscles via denervation-dependent and –independent mechanisms, and demonstrated that TAp63 and p53 transactivate the promoter and increase the expression of Trim63 (MuRF1), an effector of muscle atrophy. The study suggests a novel function for p63 as a contributor to muscular atrophic processes via the regulation of multiple genes, including the muscle atrophy gene Trim63.
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is a cell cycle regulator frequently overexpressed in cancer, particularly prostate cancer. In this study, the researchers investigated the non-canonical functions of PLK1 in prostate cancer and found that its overexpression in prostate epithelial cells triggers oncogenic transformation and transcriptional reprogramming leading to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stimulation of cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, PLK1 downregulation in metastatic prostate cancer cells enhances epithelial characteristics and inhibits cell motility. The signaling mechanisms underlying the observed effects of PLK1 involve direct PLK1-dependent phosphorylation of CRAF with subsequent stimulation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2-Fra1-ZEB1/2 signaling pathway. The researchers suggest PLK1 plays a pivotal role in PCa etiology and is a potent activator of MAPK signaling, suggesting potential implications in the development of new therapies to suppress oncogenic transformation and invasion in prostate cancer.
The inferior colliculus (IC) in the midbrain is an important part of the central auditory system. However, the organization of the IC microcircuitry is largely unknown. Through a multifaceted approach in mice, a novel class of IC principal neurons, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) neurons, has been identified. These glutamatergic stellate cells have sustained firing patterns and extensive axons that project to long-range targets. Using optogenetic circuit mapping, it was found that VIP neurons integrate input from the contralateral IC and the dorsal cochlear nucleus, with the latter driving feedforward inhibition to VIP neurons. VIP neurons represent approximately 20% of stellate neurons in the ICc and are not evenly distributed along the rostral-caudal extent of the isofrequency lamina of the ICc. VIP neurons are well positioned to influence auditory computations in a number of brain regions.
This article describes the results of a study on the factors that contribute to the onset of fibrosis in particular tissues. The study used Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism to investigate collagen deposition in fat body adipocytes, which are known for their role in lipid storage and metabolic regulation, as well as their activity as an active secretory tissue that produces serum proteins and clotting factors normally present in the insect blood. The study found that plasma membrane overgrowth causes pericellular collagen accumulation, resulting in fibrotic deposits. The study also found that both the absence of negative toll immune regulator Cactus and excess plasma membrane caused by increased secretion can lead to fibrosis. These findings suggest that traffic imbalances and plasma membrane topology may contribute to fibrosis, potentially placing fibrotic deposits both downstream and upstream of immune signaling, which is consistent with the chronic character of fibrotic diseases.
The principal K+ current in mouse sperm, IKSper, is regulated strongly by pHi, carried by the Slo3 channel, and sets the Vm. However, in human sperm, IKSper is activated weakly by pHi and more strongly by Ca2+. Slo3 is identified in human sperm; heterologously expressed human Slo3 is activated by Ca2+ rather than by alkaline pHi. Human IKSper and heterologously expressed human Slo3 currents share similar biophysical properties, pharmacology, and ligand dependence. Mouse and human sperm inventory and control of ion channels are different. The different channel inventories and different mechanisms of channel activation might reflect adaptations to species-specific challenges encountered by sperm in the female genital tract. In conclusion, under recording conditions used here, Vm in human sperm is only modestly sensitive to pHi, but IKSper is activated by Ca2+.
A new study shows how bacterial populations autonomously smooth out large-scale perturbations in their morphology, enabling them to continue migrating collectively via chemotaxis, the biased motion of cells up a chemical gradient. This smoothing process arises from spatial variations in the ability of cells to sense and respond to the local nutrient gradient, revealing a population-scale consequence of the manner in which individual cells transduce external signals. The study demonstrates that stretching of bacterial arrangements can be regulated by the wavelength of the perturbation and the ease with which cells migrate.
Blindsight is the ability of some patients with cortical blindness to respond to visual stimuli they are not consciously aware of. A study sought to identify which neural pathways support blindsight. The researchers found a relationship between the presence of preserved vision in hemianopic patients and an intact white-matter pathway between the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and motion area hMT+. Individuals with LGN-hMT+ pathway damage were found to be blindsight negative, while all blindsight positive individuals showed intact LGN-hMT+ pathways. Two white matter pathways previously implicated in blindsight, the superior colliculus to hMT+, and between hMT+ in each hemisphere, were not consistently present in blindsight positive cases. The study results suggest that understanding the visual pathways crucial for residual vision may direct future rehabilitation strategies for hemianopia patients.
The study explores how two plant receptors, FLS2 and BRI1, that activate immunity and growth respectively, maintain signalling specificity despite using common downstream signalling components. The researchers used live-cell imaging, single-particle tracking and co-localisation analysis to observe the signal pathways of the two receptors. Results showed that the two form plasma membrane (PM) nanoclusters which are spatially separated providing signalling specificity between the two pathways. The findings showed that the spatiotemporal localisation of FLS2 and BRI1 within different PM nanodomains contributes to signalling specificity.
A study published in eLife reveals new information about the neural processes involved in spatial processing during natural behaviour, and provides experimental evidence that visual cortical neurons are functionally coupled with hippocampal place cells, which are crucial for spatial memory. The research discovered that, like hippocampal place cells, many neurons in the primary visual cortex of rats running on a track selectively fire at specific locations, with the V1 location-specific activity, on average, leading hippocampal place cell activity both spatially and temporally. The study also found that external sensory cues, of which visual cues are especially important, play a pivotal role in place cell activities.
Researchers studying 11 patients with Parkinson's disease have identified two different neural mechanisms involved in fast or cautious decision-making, which they call speed-accuracy adjustments. The basal ganglia is thought to modulate decision thresholds that decide at what point evidence accumulation ends and the option with the strongest evidence is selected. The new study, which uses subthalamic nucleus activity recordings and EEG, finds two correlates, one low-frequency and one beta, which differ in cortical topography and spectral characteristics as well as in the relative timing of recruitment and in their precise relationship with decision thresholds.
The role of miR-124 in the control of male sexual differentiation and behavior in Drosophila has been investigated. MiR-124 is required to ensure gender-appropriate pheromone production in males and its mutation resulted in increased male-male courtship and reduced reproductive success with females, due to aberrant pheromone production. The mutant males produced lower levels of 11-cis-Vaccenyl-Acetate, which stimulates female receptivity towards copulation, and higher levels of pentacosenes, which act as male aphrodisiacs. These findings suggest a role for miR-124 in limiting the inappropriate expression of the female form of the transformer, thereby controlling sexual differentiation, and show that miRNAs provide a secondary means of controlling the cascade of sex-specific splicing events that control sexual differentiation in Drosophila.
The central thalamus is responsible for regulating forebrain arousal and behavior. This study used a combination of optogenetics, fMRI, electrophysiology, and video-EEG monitoring to investigate the networks responsible for switching brain state. The study found that 40 and 100 Hz stimulation of the central thalamus resulted in widespread activation of the forebrain, including the frontal cortex and striatum, leading to a state of arousal in sleeping rats. In contrast, 10 Hz stimulation resulted in significantly less activation and behavioral arrest. The study also investigated the involvement of the zona incerta and found that, when inhibited during 10 Hz central thalamus stimulation, cortical inhibition was reduced. Overall, this study provides a better understanding of the connection between the central thalamus and its role in regulating brain state and behavior.
A study has found that squamous cell carcinomas occurring at transition zones are highly malignant tumors with a poor prognosis. The study focuses on identifying the cell population and signaling pathways involved in the progression of such tumors. The researchers found a highly tumorigenic cancer stem cell population in a mouse model of transitional epithelial carcinoma and uncovered a novel mechanism by which loss of TGFβ receptor II (Tgfbr2) mediates invasion and metastasis through de-repression of ELMO1, a RAC-activating guanine exchange factor, specifically in cancer stem cells. The study also highlights the unique susceptibility of transition zones to carcinogenesis and the lack of understanding of the signaling and cellular mechanisms that drive transitional epithelial carcinogenesis.
Researchers have used a genetically encoded system to visualize single-molecule reverse-transcribed HIV-1 cDNA molecules in infected cells. Their findings suggest that nuclear uncoating by physical disruption, rather than cooperative disassembly of the capsid-lattice, followed by physical separation from the pre-integration complex may be responsible for HIV-1 replication. The study also found that the viral cone-shaped capsid likely guides and shields the genome through the cytosolic environment. The study demonstrated that individual subviral complexes containing viral cDNA and its content, subcellular distribution, and trafficking can be characterized to shed light on the pathway of productive replication.
Scientists have discovered a new fossil flower, Nanjinganthus dendrostyla gen . et sp. nov., in China that was a bona fide angiosperm from the Jurassic period, with evidence pointing towards completely enclosed seeds. The researchers hope that the discovery will shed new light on long-standing research into the origin of angiosperms, which has been a topic of debate for many botanists. The fossils were spotted in the South Xiangshan Formation, and observations were made of 264 specimens of 198 individual flowers, enabling an evidence-based reconstruction of the flower.
The article discusses the "Mother's Curse" hypothesis, which predicts that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) will accumulate mutations that are beneficial or neutral in females but harmful in males. Male-harming mtDNA mutations have been difficult to detect in animals, but the article presents an experimental evolution strategy that led to the isolation of a mtDNA variant (COIIG177S) that impairs male fertility without impairing other male or female functions. The study provides one of the clearest examples of a male-harming mtDNA mutation in animals and sheds light on the stringent requirements for optimal mtDNA function in sperm development. The article notes that male-harming mtDNA mutations are expected to accumulate due to relaxed selection, but natural populations may maintain indirect selection against such mutations or evolve nuclear genome-encoded suppressors to restore male fitness.
The nucleoporin Nup98 is often involved in leukemogenic fusion proteins, including Nup98-HoxA9, which has an unclear function. The authors found that Nup98-HoxA9 forms nuclear aggregates and is preferentially targeted to Hox cluster regions, where it induces aberrant Hox gene regulation. Nup98-HoxA9 fusions are particularly associated with the impairment of cellular differentiation. The authors suggest that Nup98-HoxA9 may act as a regulator of chromatin modifications that is recruited to specific domains via chromosomally bound Crm1. The authors demonstrated in their study that stable expression of Nup98-HoxA9 in mouse embryonic stem cells selectively induces the expression of H
Multicellular organisms depend on the intricate communication between neurons across synapses to perform a wide array of functions such as movement, thought and behavior. New research has identified how the Wnd/DLK pathway is activated when Unc-104's function is disrupted, leading to a suppression of synaptic development and synaptic transmission defects. Loss of Unc-104 fails to form synaptic boutons and active zones, and impairs synapse structure and function by restricting the expression level of active zone and synaptic vesicle components. The kinesin-3 family member Unc-104 / KIF1A is required for the transportation of many presynaptic components to synapses, and its dysfunction results in synaptic imperfections in mice, flies and worms. Though many synaptic defects in unc-104-null mutants are mediated independently of Unc-104's transport function, it remains unclear how AZ transport and assembly take place. The study found that synapse development likely involves global coordination of the synthesis and transportation of both AZ and synaptic vesicles components.
Researchers have discovered a "hybrid pathway" that produces cholesterol in mice: named "modified K-R", which seems to be the preferred pathway in mice, over the classic K-R pathway. The study used stable isotope and isotopomer analysis to identify and measure the interrelated pathways in different tissues of mice. The Bloch pathway was found to produce 8% in preputial gland to 97% in testes, and the overall usage of the two pathways was found to be highly variable and tissue-specific. Meanwhile, the depletion of cholesterol in cultured cells led to increased flux through the Bloch pathway, whereas the overexpression of 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR24) enhanced the usage of the MK-R pathway. The maintenance of two pathways enables the regulation of diverse cellular processes, the biosynthetic intermediates of the Bloch and K-R pathways have distinguishable effects on cholesterol homeostasis, fatty acid synthesis, and inflammation. Nonetheless, the relative use of the two pathways and their responses to changes in cholesterol availability are not yet fully understood.
The study examines how diversity in bacterial chemotaxis systems can enable adaptation to diverse environments. Even when cells inhabit the same environment, stochastic fluctuations in gene expression can lead to different levels of proteins, resulting in diverse chemotactic behaviors. The article proposes that this diversity could be an adaptive strategy to navigate different environments. The study seeks to determine how advantageous diversity can arise from a single chemotaxis network, and the possible mechanisms that allow adaptation in response to environmental pressures.
Cell polarization is important for many cellular functions and is regulated by the small Rho-family GTPase Cdc42. In budding yeast, polarization is associated with a focus of Cdc42•GTP, which is sustained by a positive feedback loop involving a polarity complex containing Cla4, a Cdc42-binding effector, Bem1, a scaffold, and Cdc24, a Cdc42 GEF. Optogenetic tools have been developed to study yeast cell polarization by recruiting yeast polarity proteins to defined sites on the cell cortex. Local recruitment of Cdc24 or Bem1 is sufficient to induce polarization by triggering self-sustaining Cdc42 activity. However, before cell cycle entry, recruitment of Cdc24, but not Bem1, induces a metastable pool of Cdc42 that is sustained by positive feedback. Upon Cdk1 activation, recruitment of either Cdc24 or Bem1 creates a stable site of polarization that induces budding and inhibits formation of competing sites. The existence of alternative modes of positive feedback, their respective behaviors, and how they are influenced by the cell cycle have been demonstrated.
FoF1-ATP synthase is an enzyme that synthesizes or hydrolyzes ATP coupled with proton translocation at the inner mitochondrial membrane, chloroplast thylakoid membrane, and bacterial plasma membrane. Recently, studies have suggested that key glutamic acid residues in the c-subunit oligomeric ring contribute to proton release and uptake in each step of the rotation. However, no studies have demonstrated cooperativity among c-subunits toward FoF1-ATP synthase activity. A recent study addressed this using Bacillus PS3 ATP synthase and genetically fused single-chain c-ring. They found that mutations in the c-subunits decreased ATP synthesis and proton pump activities, and activity further decreased as the distance between the two mutation sites increased, indicating cooperation among c-subunits. Proton transfer-coupled molecular simulations revealed that prolonged proton uptake in mutated c-subunits is shared between two c-subunits, explaining the observed cooperation in biochemical assays.
A new theoretical model for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) populations during development has been produced, allowing statistical comparison of proposed bottleneck mechanisms, which limits the ability to address inherited mtDNA diseases. Results showed most support for a combination of binomial partitioning of mtDNAs at cell division and random mtDNA turnover, meaning that the exact magnitude of mtDNA copy number depletion is flexible. The study also showed that upregulation of mtDNA degradation may increase the power of the bottleneck to avoid inherited disease.
The article discusses decision-making when faced with many alternatives, which is a common occurrence in everyday life. While there is a lot of research on small choice sets, there is relatively little on larger ones. The article aims to bridge this gap by developing and comparing different models in a many-alternative value-based choice experiment with 9, 16, 25, or 36 alternatives. The study finds that human choices are best explained by models incorporating an active effect of gaze on subjective value. The article also explores participants' visual search behavior during decision-making, finding that gaze duration and probability of looking at an item were dependent on its liking rating, size, and position, as well as the number of items in the choice set.
The article discusses the challenges of studying protein interactions and local proteomes in rare cell types or events, and introduces proximity labeling (PL) as a tool for discovering protein neighborhoods defining functional complexes and/or organellar protein compositions. The article focuses on the improved BirA* variants TurboID and miniTurbo for PL applications in plants, and provides data on their activity and efficacy under different experimental conditions. The authors also present a case study where they used TurboID to identify proteins in close proximity to a low-abundance transcription factor and to characterize the nuclear proteome of a rare cell type in plants. The study provides a set of gateway-compatible entry and destination vectors that can be used to express TurboID or miniTurbo under a promoter of choice, and identifies key experimental conditions to optimize the efficiency of PL with low-abundance proteins in plants.
R-loops are structures in which a strand of RNA is hybridized to a strand of DNA while the other strand of DNA is looped out. They are enriched at promoters where they may alter gene expression by changing histone modifications and transcription levels. However, the exact location of R-loops in promoter regions remains unclear. To overcome this problem, bisDRIP-seq was developed, which is an approach to map R-loops at near-nucleotide resolution throughout the genome. The location of promoter-associated R-loops depends on the presence of introns. In intron-containing genes, R-loops are bounded between the transcription start site and the first exon-intron junction, whereas in intronless genes, the 3' boundary displays gene-specific heterogeneity, and promoter-associated R-loop formation is common. This study provides a high-resolution map of R-loops and identifies gene structure as a critical determinant of R-loop formation.
IMiD drugs, previously linked to severe birth defects in the 1950s, including thalidomide, have continued to be used in cancer treatments despite the molecular basis of their teratogenicity being unknown. Doctors have long sought to understand the precise causes of thalidomide syndrome. A team from the University of California at San Fransisco have identified a link, discovering that these drugs disrupt a broad transcription network via the degradation of several zinc finger transcription factors, including SALL4. SALL4 is a developmental factor associated with limb and heart development, and heterozygous loss of function mutations in SALL4 may result in birth defects similar to those caused by thalidomide.
The article discusses the use of non-invasive information-theoretic tools to reveal communication protocols that guide complex social interactions among animals. The study focuses on the tandem-running behavior of ants and termites and how their communication protocols differ despite using similar short-term signaling mechanisms. The researchers used transfer entropy to analyze the information flow between subjects based on observational data from repeated interactions. The findings suggest that ants and termites have different communication protocols for their tandem runs, which explain the functional differences between the two species. The article highlights the importance of temporal correlations in studying animal behavior and advocates for the use of quantitative and non-interventional methods, such as transfer entropy, to capture the complexity of social interactions.
A study investigated the accuracy of polygenic scores in predicting educational performance in individual pupils. Using data from a UK cohort study with data linkage to national schooling records, the study found that while polygenic scores can identify group level differences, they currently have limited use for accurately predicting individual educational performance or for personalized education. The study also assessed the performance of polygenic scores over and above phenotypic data that are available to schools and found that parental socioeconomic factors were more predictive of educational outcomes than polygenic scores. The study suggests that genetic information has limited use in personalized education, and policies should focus on other phenotypic measures that are currently readily available to schools.
Loss of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) gene is associated with the development of invasive urothelial carcinoma in the bladder, but the molecular mechanisms involved are not well understood. Researchers found that loss of Shh is linked to hypermethylation of the CpG shore of the Shh gene. Inhibition of DNA methylation increased Shh expression and prevented the development of mouse bladder cancer. In fully grown tumours, provision of the Hedgehog (Hh) protein slows tumour growth, stimulated subtype conversion of basal to luminal-like urothelial carcinoma via the stromal response to Shh signals. Epigenetic regulation is also associated with human invasive urothelial carcinomas.
The document describes a study on the regulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression during fly embryogenesis. miRNAs play a central role in post-transcriptional regulation of protein-coding genes. The study found that regulation of miRNA expression is controlled at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels and that the stability of mature miRNAs is influenced by their 5' nucleotides. The study also revealed the dynamics of miRNA production and degradation, as well as the significance of the rapid degradation of miRNAs in gene regulation with distinct evolutionary signatures at the target sites in the transcriptome. The results suggested that complex mechanisms regulate miRNA expression to support normal development. The study provides insight into miRNA regulation in developmental processes at a global level and reveals complex mechanisms that support precise regulation of miRNA expression.
The ability to generalize aversive decision-making allows individuals to avoid potential threats after experiencing a limited set of exemplars. However, over-generalization leading to excessive avoidance can be associated with psychological disorders such as anxiety and depression. The study used a reinforcement learning model to distinguish different contributions to the generalization of instrumental avoidance in two groups of human volunteers. Subjects were found to exhibit generalization from aversive feedback, which was associated with anxiety and intrusive thoughts. According to the authors, these results reveal a set of distinct mechanisms that mediate generalization in avoidance learning and show how specific individual differences within them can yield anxiety.
Researchers have identified an important protein, thrombospondin-releated protein 1 (TRP1), in the release of sporozoites of the malaria pathogen, Plasmodium, into vertebrate hosts by infected Anopheles mosquitoes. The protein is important for the invasion and egress from the mosquito's salivary glands. TRP1, which shares domains with TRAP-family proteins, is absent in current vaccine candidates. It is believed that investigating the structure and function of TRP1 further may lead to the development of a new target for anti-malaria prophylaxis. 
Status epilepticus (SE) is a neurological emergency that requires new treatments. In vitro studies suggest that inhibition of estrogen synthesis in the brain could be an effective treatment for SE. The study showed that inhibiting estrogen synthesis in rats strongly suppressed seizures induced by kainic acid. The results revealed neurosteroid estrogen synthesis as an unknown factor in the escalation of seizures, and acute treatment with an aromatase inhibitor may be an effective new approach to seizure control.
Mitochondrial acyl carrier protein (ACP) is well known to play an important role in the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway within mitochondria; however, researchers have now discovered that ACP also plays an essential, but previously unknown, role in iron sulfur cluster biogenesis – a vital biosynthetic process within mitochondria. The researchers found that ACP is a stable and essential subunit of the eukaryotic FeS biogenesis complex, and the absence of ACP destabilises the complex and depletes FeS throughout the cell. ACP’s role in iron sulfur cluster biogenesis depends on its covalently bound 4’-phosphopantetheine-conjugated acyl chain to support maximum cysteine desulfurase activity. The findings highlight that ACP serves a dual role of coordinating mitochondrial fatty acid and FeS biogenesis.
Cerebellar Purkinje neurons promote fast repetitive firing due to resurgent sodium currents, which are facilitated in part by a voltage-gated Na+ (NaV) "resurgent" current. The molecular components underlying these peculiar properties of NaV channels have not been identified; however, this study found that the NaV channel auxiliary subunit FGF14 "b" isoform, which is linked to inherited spinocerebellar ataxias, controls resurgent current and repetitive firing in Purkinje neurons. Specifically, FGF14 knockdown decreased channel availability, diminished the late NaV current, and accelerated channel inactivation rate, thereby reducing resurgent current and repetitive spiking. The study suggested that the FGF14b N-terminus is a potent regulator of resurgent NaV current in cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
The commands that hold the limb at a target location after movement depend on the integration of the commands that moved the limb to that location, contradicting the assumption that the two sets of commands are independent. The postural controller may possess a subcortical feedforward module that uses move commands to calculate hold commands. This computation may arise within an unknown subcortical system that integrates cortical commands to stabilize limb posture. The architecture assumed in optimal control formulations of reaching, in which movement and postural controllers are independent, is not consistent with that of the eye and head. There may be a causal link between movement and holding, and the postural field has a null point that is shifted by changes to reach commands. Finally, across arm movements and finger movements, the hold period commands depend on the preceding commands that moved the limb to its current location.
The insulin and type-1 insulin-like growth factor receptors are homologous receptor tyrosine kinases that regulate cell metabolism, growth, and differentiation in various mammalian tissues. Each subunit undergoes a cleavage, giving rise to an alpha and beta chain, and is composed of six extracellular domains, a transmembrane region, a juxtamembrane region, a tyrosine kinase domain, and a C-terminal tail. Autophosphorylation of the kinase domain is a key element of receptor activation, and a specific asymmetric dimer of kinase regions is necessary for activation of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor, a related RTK. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying IR family activation, the researchers inspected crystal structures of the IR ECD for clues to the nature of conformational changes that occur when ligand binds and identified an underappreciated dimer in the crystal structure of the related Insulin Receptor with Insulin bound that allows direct comparison with unliganded IR and suggests a mechanism by which ligand regulates IR/IGF1R activity. The researchers show that the IGF1R ECD autoinhibits activity by holding the TMs apart in the absence of ligand.
Researchers from South Korea and the US have found a new mechanism by which Sir2, an enzyme produced by the sirtuin family of proteins, enhances longevity﻿. Sirtuins have previously been linked to increasing lifespan through calorie restriction in several organisms. While earlier studies have supported the link between sirtuins and extended life, this theory has been disputed recently. The research found that Sir2 determines how long the organism lives through its phosphorylation at serine 473. Sir2 is a relatively conserved family of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent protein deacetylases, which are widely believed to extend life by mediating transcriptional silencing at different cellular loci. These silencing functions are important for DNA repair and developmental functions. The research finds that Sir2 binds more tightly to the promoter regions of genes, which are linked to the lifespan circuitry.
The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum invades erythrocytes, and its merozoites discharge specialized secretory organelles called rhoptries during invasion. The RhopH3 protein is the smallest component of the RhopH complex, but its role in invasion is unclear. Here the authors demonstrate that RhopH3 is essential for parasite survival and is involved in both invasion and formation of the Plasmodium surface anion channel/nutrient-permeability pathway essential for parasite survival within host erythrocytes. Deletion of the rhopH3 gene decreased the level of erythrocyte invasion and blocked intracellular development at the trophozoite stage. The RhopH complex is released during invasion and inserted into the nascent parasitophorous vacuole membrane soon after parasite entry. The RhopH1/Clag3 proteins are important for Plasmodium surface anion channel/nutrient-permeability pathway activity, and RhopH1/Clag3.2 may form the channel itself. RhopH1/Clag3 proteins are not essential for parasite growth, but RhopH1/Clag9 is essential for CD36 binding. The RhopH2 protein is encoded by a single-copy gene and is of unknown function.
This document describes a scalable approach to analyzing protein localization changes across multiple experiments. The approach combines data from high-throughput imaging of yeast strains expressing GFP-tagged proteins and uses unsupervised cluster analysis to differentiate specific responses from general ones, discover nuance in localization behavior, and form hypotheses by clustering proteins with similar patterns. The method involves measuring interpretable features to describe the average distribution of GFP-tagged proteins and detecting localization changes between pairs of protein localization profiles. The resulting protein change profiles are concatenated and clustered to form functionally specific themes, allowing for a better understanding of how cells respond to genetic and environmental perturbations. The approach is demonstrated using datasets from the CYCLoPs database and is found to be scalable to large image collections.
The growth and development of plants and animals is shaped by the nutrients they consume. In plants, the transition from juvenile to adult (vegetative phase change) is controlled by a decrease in miR156, a microRNA that regulates the expression of SPL genes. This study found that exogenous sugar reduces the abundance of miR156, leading to a change in vegetative phase change. The sugar-induced repression of miR156 was dependent on the signaling activity of HEXOKINASE1. Defoliation also leads to an increase in miR156 levels, which can be suppressed by exogenous glucose. These findings provide a molecular link between nutrient availability and developmental timing in plants, highlighting the importance of sugar in bringing about vegetative phase change.
The phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) plays a key role in delineating transcribed regions within chromatin by recruiting histone methylases and deacetylases. Genome-wide nucleosome mapping shows that CTD S2 phosphorylation controls nucleosome dynamics in the promoter of a subset of 324 genes. Mechanistic studies reveal that upon gene activation, the Sty1 MAP kinase directly phosphorylates the CTD S2 kinase Lsk1, which results in increased S2P nearby the promoter. We also show that the doubly phosphorylated S2P-S5P CTD has lower affinity for Set1 compared to the S5P CTD. Therefore, the peak of S2P at the promoter counteracts H3K4 methylation and the recruitment of histone deacetylases. Our results indicate that cellular signaling mediated by the PolII CTD directly controls promoter nucleosome dynamics and gene transcription of a subset of genes.
A recent study suggests that community-level competition between microorganisms in natural ecosystems can be best predicted by the community-level 'fitness', rather than intrinsic performance of individual species. The study proposes a model of competition in multi-species communities, and investigates the phenomenon of 'community coalescence', where communities interact as integrated units rather than collections of species. While the concept of 'multicellularity' is not applicable to most microbial communities, this approach provides a macroscopic perspective that can predict the outcome of competition between communities. The study presents a simplified model to investigate within-island dynamics and coalescence events between islands. The numerical simulation of competition between all possible species in the model shows that individual performance rank of a species (cost per pathway) is predictive of its survival and abundance in a community.
Scientists have developed a new tool for studying gene expression in plants and animals using bioluminescence. Current bioluminescent reporters require delivery of a substrate to the reporter, which can be costly and have non-uniform tissue penetration. The new tool, a fungal bioluminescence pathway (FBP) using a set of three genes and a luciferase enzyme, can create luminescence across various tissues in a range of plants without external substrate addition. The FBP pathway can be used to study spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression and hormone fluxes. The new tool lays the groundwork for future construction of programmable auto-luminescent plant traits, such as light-driven plant-pollinator interactions or light-emitting plant-based sensors.
This document describes the emergence of complex flower-like patterns in bacterial colonies grown from mixtures of motile and non-motile bacterial species on a soft agar surface, with the non-motile bacteria accumulating at the boundary of the colony to trigger an instability that creates the patterns. The mechanism of the pattern formation is elucidated by a mathematical model for the frictional motion of the colony interface, with friction depending on the local concentration of the non-motile species. This study highlights the importance of mechanical interactions in shaping the structure of bacterial communities and suggests that such patterns may be broadly generalizable to other multi-species colonies.
The article discusses the ability of primary sensory cortices to respond to stimuli of different sensory modalities, known as cross-modal responses, and how learning can modulate these responses. The study focused on the gustatory cortex and recorded single unit responses to auditory, visual, somatosensory, and olfactory stimuli in rats before and after associative learning. Results showed that in untrained rats, the majority of neurons were modulated by a single modality, but upon learning, the prevalence of cross-modal responsive neurons and their breadth of tuning increased, leading to a greater overlap of representations. The study also investigated the convergence of stimuli of different sensory modalities onto single gustatory cortex neurons and found that the majority of cross-modal neurons were activated exclusively by one of the non-taste stimuli. Overall, the results suggest that the gustatory cortex represents cross-modal stimuli according to their sensory identity and that learning changes the overlap of cross-modal representations.
The migration of cell collectives is important during embryonic development and relies on mechanical and chemical cues. The FGF pathway is necessary for the migration of the parapineal in the zebrafish epithalamus, but the mechanism of FGF activation in leading cells is unclear. This study investigates the role of Notch signaling in modulating FGF activity within the parapineal. It is found that Notch signaling controls the migration of the parapineal through its capacity to restrict FGF pathway activation to a few leading cells. Loss or gain of function for Notch signaling interferes with the specification of parapineal cell identity, but does not affect the number of parapineal cells expressing Tbx2b, a putative marker for parapineal progenitor cells. Our data suggest that the Notch pathway regulates the specification and migration of parapineal cells independently, and that the role of Notch signaling in promoting parapineal migration depends on its ability to restrict FGF pathway activation to a few parapineal cells.
Researchers have established appetitive and aversive visual learning tests for fruit flies that are similar to widely-used olfactory learning tests, and allow for direct comparison of the cellular requirements for visual and olfactory memories. Dopamine neurons were found to drive formation of both sensory memories, and different yet partially overlapping subsets of mushroom body intrinsic neurons were required for visual and olfactory memories. The results suggest that different sensory memories are processed in a common brain center in a way that avoids the repetition of similar circuit motifs.
The hippocampal system plays a crucial role in establishing episodic memory and spatial navigation, but the neuronal substrates behind different memories are poorly understood. In a study using rats, the activity patterns of hippocampal neuronal ensembles were monitored during a continuous task involving visually guided and memory-guided navigation in a constant environment. The study found that the activity patterns represent spatiotemporal contexts constructed by past, present, and expected future places in conjunction with visually or mnemonically guided non-spatial contexts to form episodes. The findings suggest that the hierarchical organization of contexts, based on pattern separation and completion, enables the hippocampus to play a dual role in spatial navigation and the recall of episodic memory.
This article discusses the global dissemination patterns of hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotypes A and D. The study used 916 HBV-D and 493 HBV-A sequences to reconstruct their phylogeny and estimate regional clustering. The putative origin of genotype D was in North Africa/Middle East, and HBV-D sequences formed low levels of regional clustering for the Middle East and Southern Europe. HBV-A sequences formed two major clusters, one including sequences mostly from sub-Saharan Africa and the other including sequences mostly from Western and Central Europe. The study found considerable differences in the global dissemination patterns of HBV-D and HBV-A and different levels of monophyletic clustering in relation to the regions of prevalence of each genotype.
The heterogeneity of physical and functional characteristics in isogenic cell populations is due to stochasticity in biochemical processes and resource distribution. Non-genetic inheritance of cellular components can influence cellular characteristics at shorter timescales, and this inheritance is property specific with long-term memory of up to 10 generations. The new microfluidic device called the "sisters machine" allows tracking of two sister cells as they age together and measure the non-genetic memory of bacterial cells for several different traits. The Pearson correlation function is used to compare the correlation between the values of a specific cellular property at time t. The study finds that non-genetic memory in bacteria is preserved for up to eight successive cell divisions. The new measurement technique can provide further insight into non-genetic inheritance and cellular memory in bacteria.
The paper explores how plasticity, the ability of an organism to adapt to different environments through flexible, non-canalized, developmental processes, evolved among butterflies, specifically focusing on the size of eyespots in response to environmental temperature in Bicyclus anynana satyrid butterflies. Through a comparative study, the researchers reconstructed the evolution of known physiological and molecular components of eyespot size plasticity and found that 20E titer plasticity in response to temperature is a pre-adaptation shared by all butterfly species examined, whereas expression of EcR in eyespot centers and eyespot sensitivity to 20E are both derived traits found only in a subset of species with eyespots. Furthermore, the authors suggest that phenotypic plasticity in eyespot size is a complex derived adaptation of the lineage. 
The NDC80 complex is important for the attachment of chromosomes to spindle microtubules during cell division, but it was unclear how multiple copies of the complex operate to attach to the microtubules. By engineering kinetochore modules with multiple copies of the complex, researchers were able to demonstrate that multivalency is crucial for an effective attachment to microtubules, with the modules being able to track depolymerizing microtubules and stall and rescue the depolymerization in a force-dependent manner. The study also suggests that NDC80 tracks depolymerizing microtubules by harnessing force generated during microtubule disassembly, and that NDC80 multivalency stabilizes microtubule binding.
Mitochondria are essential organelles in cells that play a vital role in energy production, metabolism, and programmed cell death. Recent findings suggest that the internal organization of mitochondria, which is responsible for mitophagy, apoptosis, and metabolism, plays an important role in mitochondrial architecture. The mitochondrial architecture is comprised of the outer and inner membranes, and the cristae protrude into the matrix from narrow tubule-like or slot-like crista junctions (CJ), which require their construction and maintenance. A new study identifies Aim24 as an inner membrane protein that interacts with the MICOS complex, which is required for the formation of crista junctions and contact sites between inner and outer membranes. Aim24 is necessary for the integrity of the MICOS complex, and its modification leads to the loss of cristae and respiratory complexes. Proteins like Aim24 are identified that are required for mitochondrial architecture, morphology, and the maintenance of the protein and lipid composition. Future directions could include identifying and characterizing the proteins and lipids responsible for mitochondrial architecture with respect to structure, suborganellar location, function, and dynamics.
Researchers have used cryo-EM imaging to examine RNF213, the major susceptibility factor for Moyamoya disease, a cerebrovascular disorder. RNF213 is a large and complex E3 ubiquitin ligase, combining RING and AAA domains in a single polypeptide, and has a role as a metabolic gatekeeper. The cryo-EM structure of RNF213 highlights the growing mechanistic diversity in ubiquitination cascades, as it uncovers a distinct type of E3 enzyme. The researchers suggest that RNF213 may have an unexplored ubiquitin-transfer mechanism that proceeds in a RING-independent manner. Pathologic MMD mutations cluster in the composite E3 domain, likely interfering with substrate ubiquitination. The research provides a molecular framework for investigating RNF213's role in lipid metabolism, hypoxia, and angiogenesis.
Sea slugs of the Sacoglossan clade have the ability to maintain functional chloroplasts, which they steal from algae they prey on. It was previously unknown how the slugs preserve the chloroplasts, but researchers have discovered that the slug Elysia timida induces changes to the photosynthetic light reactions of the chloroplasts it steals. The study found that the plastoquinone pool of slug chloroplasts remains oxidized, which can suppress reactive oxygen species formation, and that the chloroplasts rely on oxygen-dependent electron sinks during rapid changes in light intensity. These photoprotective mechanisms contribute to the long-term functionality of the chloroplasts inside the slugs.
Plant-herbivore interactions are dominant in terrestrial ecology, with insects being among the most versatile evolutionary innovators due to their ability to disarm multiple chemical plant defenses. Insects commonly use sequestration as a strategy to detoxify noxious metabolites, which is frequently for their own benefit against predators. In this study, scientists identified the broad-spectrum ATP-binding cassette transporter CpMRP of the poplar leaf beetle, Chrysomela populi, as the first candidate involved in the sequestration of phytochemicals in insects. CpMRP acts in the defensive glands of larvae as a pacemaker for the irreversible shuttling of pre-selected metabolites from the hemolymph into defensive secretions. The study found that silencing CpMRP in vivo creates a defenseless phenotype, indicating its crucial role in the secretion process. The researchers identified homologues of CpMRP in other related leaf beetle species, suggesting that exocrine gland-based defensive strategies evolved by these insects to repel their enemies rely on ABC transporters as a key element.
This document discusses a study on the function of the human SEMAPHORIN 5A (SEMA5A) gene, which is believed to be an autism susceptibility gene. The study used mouse models to show that SEMA5A regulates synaptogenesis in the hippocampal dentate granule cells (GCs) and negatively regulates dendritic spine density. The study found that PlexinA2 is a novel receptor for SEMA5A, and that loss of SEMA5A leads to increased excitatory synaptic transmission and ASD (autism spectrum disorder)-like behavioral phenotypes. The study provides support for SEMA
Researchers have used proteomic analysis and CRISPR screens to identify a host factor, G3BP1, required for efficient human and murine norovirus infection. G3BP1 was found to play a role in viral VPg-dependent translation initiation by facilitating ribosome recruitment. This discovery reveals a novel function for G3BP1 in the life cycle of positive sense RNA viruses and identifies the first host factor with pan-norovirus pro-viral activity. The study combined three independent approaches to identify host factors involved in the norovirus life cycle and identified a complex network of host factors that interact with the norovirus VPg proteins, including several involved in the host cell translation initiation process.
The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3) plays a critical role in the recruitment of pre-initiation complex (PIC) to mRNA for translation initiation. In this study, the effects of functional variants of 5 essential subunits of S. cerevisiae eIF3 on mRNA recruitment were probed using an in vitro-reconstituted system. Mutations throughout eIF3 disrupted its interaction with PIC and lowered its ability to accelerate recruitment to native yeast mRNA. Alterations to the eIF3a CTD and eIF3b/i/g slowed mRNA recruitment and mutations within eIF3b/i/g destabilized eIF2.GTP.Met-tRNAi binding to PIC. The study discovers the critical role of eIF3, requiring the eIF3a NTD, in stabilizing mRNA interactions at the exit channel, and an ancillary role at the entry channel requiring residues of the eIF3a CTD using model mRNAs lacking contacts with the 40S entry or exit channels. Structural studies delineate a network of interactions between eIF3a CTD, eIF3b, eIF3i, and eIF3g, and place them either in the vicinity of the entry channel or projecting towards the 40S intersubunit face.
The document discusses how animals, including Drosophila (fruit flies), match their food choices to their current needs to optimize fitness. In particular, the document focuses on how fruit flies regulate their intake of yeast, which is their primary source of nutrients beyond just calories, and particularly of amino acids and proteins. The document describes how specific gustatory neurons are required for the ingestion of yeast and describes a circuit mechanism that could contribute to the homeostatic regulation of protein intake. Additionally, the document discusses how different internal states act at different levels of sensory processing to modulate behavior and feeding behavior in response to changes in nutrient availability.
Researchers have discovered how axolotls regrow their spinal cord: stem cells repress their neurogenic genes and reactivate an embryonic gene program. They do this by reactivating Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signalling in the specific stem cells that go on to regenerate the new spinal cord. PCP controls  cell division and  the switch from neurogenic to proliferative stem cells that expand the stem cell pool.

Researchers have determined the cryo-EM structure of a divergent ATP synthase dimer from mitochondria of Euglena gracilis, a member of the phylum Euglenozoa that also includes human parasites. The structure includes 29 different subunits, 8 of which are newly identified, and shows a distinct architecture from other mitochondrial ATP synthases. The membrane region was determined to 2.8 Å resolution, enabling the identification of 37 associated lipids, including 25 cardiolipins, which provides insight into protein-lipid interactions and their functional roles. Additionally, the study sheds further light on the role of lipids in the synthesis of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate that is fueled by the mitochondrial ATP synthase.
The decline in skeletal muscle strength with aging is a primary cause of mobility loss and frailty in older persons. The molecular mechanisms of this decline are not well understood. A quantitative proteomic analysis was performed from skeletal muscle collected from 58 healthy persons aged 20 to 87 years. The study found that in muscle from older persons, ribosomal proteins and proteins related to energetic metabolism, including those related to the TCA cycle, mitochondria respiration, and glycolysis, were underrepresented, while proteins implicated in innate and adaptive immunity, proteostasis, and alternative splicing were overrepresented. Changes in alternative splicing with aging were confirmed by RNA-seq analysis. The study proposes that changes in the splicing machinery enables muscle cells to respond to a rise in damage with aging.
Plant-microbe associations are important for plant growth and resistance against stresses, but the ecological analysis of microbiome function remains in its infancy. To address this, a study used transformed wild tobacco plants that express an antimicrobial peptide to establish an ecological tool for plant-microbe studies in the field. The study found no major alterations in the root-associated microbial communities and showed that the diversity of natural microbial communities can be a major obstacle for microbiome manipulations in nature. The study suggests that novel approaches are needed to link changes in community composition to fitness consequences under native growth conditions. The consequences of ectopic expression of antimicrobial peptides on beneficial plant mutualists are still to be evaluated. The study found that the expressed peptide had no influence on plant growth and development and could selectively target a non-pathogenic subset of plant-associated bacteria. The study monitored growth performance and herbivore damage in transgenic plants expressing antimicrobial peptides and empty vector controls in their native environment.
A study published in eLife has identified genes that improve the ability of nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans to tolerate a diet rich in saturated fat. The genes, including eight that make up a novel gene called fld-1, limiting the levels of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid-containing phospholipids in plasma membranes. The gene is homologous to the human TLCD1 and TLCD2 proteins that control membrane fluidity by limiting the levels of the same type of phospholipids. Scientists concluded that preventing the inhibition of FLD-1 or TLCD1/2 increases levels of membrane phospholipids with fluidizing long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, thus reducing lipotoxicity.
Researchers have identified a microRNA that works as a negative regulator of genes that control the development of single epidermal cells in land plants. The findings suggest that the ability to suppress expression of the RSL class I genes, which are important for the development of rhizoids and root hairs, evolved independently in different lineages of the plant kingdom. The microRNA, called FEW RHIZOIDS1 (MpFRH1), was identified in the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha, a early diverging lineage of land plants. When overexpressed, MpFRH1 led to limited rhizoid and other cell-type development. The study highlights the importance of gene regulatory networks in plant development and how changes in this regulation may be a potential source of evolutionary novelty. 
Scientists have identified a new gene in a cyanobacterial marine virus that could boost electron transfer in photosynthesis, a development that enables scientists to research the detailed structure and function of photosynthetic machinery. Photosynthesis provides financially important crops, fuel and oxygen and nearly 50% of photosynthesis takes place in the ocean where single-cell cyanobacteria and algae live with their viruses. An operon encoding PSI, one of the systems that converts light energy in the photosynthesis process, has already been identified in cyanobacterial marine viruses, and scientists have now developed a PSI that mimics the features of the viral complex, named PSIPsaJF.
A new study shows that atypical memory B cells (MBCs) appear after years of repeated infections in Plasmodium falciparum malaria, which is associated with an increase in various other persistent viral infections. However, understanding the function of atypical MBCs and their relationship with classical MBCs can help create effective vaccines for malaria and other chronic infections. The study shows that both gene repertoires and somatic hypermutation rates of atypical and classical MBCs have a common developmental history. However, the study indicates that atypical MBCs express an array of inhibitory receptors and B cell receptor (BCR) signaling is stunted, resulting in impaired B cell responses including cytokine production and antibody secretion. Chronic malaria exposure leads to atypical MBCs differentiating from classical MBCs that become refractory to BCR-mediated activation, potentially interfering with the acquisition of malaria immunity. The authors suggest that modulating B cell responses may be possible to enhance malaria vaccine efficacy in malaria-endemic areas.
A study using oxygen and strontium isotope ratios of 155 baboons from 77 locations has been conducted to estimate the geoprovenance of mummified baboons recovered from ancient Egyptian temples and tombs. The results suggest that Punt was likely located in present-day Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Somalia, and Yemen. The study also revealed evidence of a captive breeding program for baboons in ancient Egypt and the prolonged captivity and physical abuse of baboons. Additionally, the study suggests that EA6738, a mummified baboon, was imported into Egypt and lived there for many years. The study was limited by its small sample size and the fact that each mummified baboon in the sample died under captive conditions.
A study on Drosophila flies has shown that bacterial infection reduces the female's oviposition, and that the component of bacteria cell walls which activates the flies' immune response, peptidoglycan, triggers this behavioural change. Peptidoglycan regulates egg-laying rate by activating NF-κB signaling pathway in octopaminergic neurons, and a peptidoglycan-degrading enzyme acts in these neurons to buffer this behavioural response. The study also shows that a unique ligand and signaling cascade are used in immune cells to mount an immune response and in neurons to control fly behaviour following infection.
The immune system's ability to respond selectively to foreign organisms depends upon the lymph node, which plays an important part in the initiation of the adaptive immune system by bringing together antigens, antigen-presenting cells and lymphocytes. Lymph node stromal cells are resident non-hematopoietic cells that control the communication between dendritic cells and lymphocytes, limiting T-cell activation and proliferation, and promoting the survivals of dendritic cells. In this study, MHC-II expression on lymph node stromal cells was found to be instrumental for the normal regulatory T cell (Treg) response and maintenance of immune quiescence. In the absence of MHC-II expression by lymph node stromal cells in lymph node transplants, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells became activated, leading to transplant rejection. These results add a new layer to the known mechanisms of how lymph node stromal cells regulate peripheral immunity.
Using Focused Ion Beam/Scanning Electron Microscopy (FIB/SEM) technology, researchers have reconstructed 24,752 synapses in the hippocampal CA1 field of five human brains obtained from autopsies. They found that the majority of synapses were excitatory, targeting dendritic spines and displaying a macular shape, and that there were remarkable differences in synaptic organization between layers. This research provides the first extensive description of the synaptic organization in the neuropil of the human CA1 region, which is crucial for better understanding its functional organization in health and disease. The study revealed differences in synaptic density and spatial organization between humans and rodents, emphasizing the need for caution when making interpretations in translational studies.
The study investigates whether interaural time difference statistics in natural acoustic scenes impact human auditory spatial perception. The researchers hypothesize that natural ITD statistics influence the neural code for ITD, which affects spatial perception. The study found that natural ITD statistics were correlated with auditory spatial perception and that this supports the hypothesis that the human brain has incorporated natural statistics of spatial cues to the neural code underlying auditory spatial perception. The study also found that selectivity for the square root of Fisher information statistic (which combines ITDv and ITDrc) underlies the evolution of the neural code supporting discrimination thresholds. The study concludes that this supports the idea that ITD statistics influence the density distribution of ITD tuning and that this may be genetically encoded and conserved across human subjects.

The document discusses the role of Nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (NLR)-containing proteins in plant immunity to intracellular pathogens, specifically focusing on the barley Mla disease resistance locus and its ability to detect avirulence effectors from the fungal pathogen Blumeria graminis. The researchers isolated several allele-specific avirulence effectors and found evidence for direct detection by the MLA receptors in plant cells. The document also discusses the co-evolution of NLR repertoires in plants with host-adapted pathogens and the role of powdery mildews in triggering immunity responses in plants. The researchers used transcriptome-wide association studies to identify AVRa genes and found a high level of genetic variation among AVRa genes within a local Bgh population.
Researchers have used cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computational modeling to investigate the absence of arrhythmia in embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS) patients despite the presence of fibrosis comparable to levels seen in patients with atrial fibrillation (AFib). The study found that some ESUS patients have latent pre-clinical fibrotic substrate that could be a future source of arrhythmogenicity. The researchers suggest that ESUS patients with fibrotic atria may be spared from AFib due to an absence of arrhythmia triggers. The study provides insights on the role of atrial fibrosis as a pathophysiological nexus between AFib and stroke.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small regulatory molecules that reduce protein production from mRNAs, have long thought to target mRNAs during the post-transcription phase, when ribosomes are not present. However, miRNA-targeted mRNAs are often found to be associated with polysomes during active translation, which are incompatible observations. A recent study has found that miRNA-mediated mRNA decay occurs co-translationally, initiated by mRNA decapping while targeted mRNAs are polysome bound, and proceeds 5' to 3' following the last translating ribosome. The study analyzed the Drosophila mRNAs encoding the proapoptotic proteins, reaper and hid, and confirmed that the destabilization of reporter mRNAs was miRNA-mediated. This study provides a unifying explanation for a large body of experimental data and resolves the conundrum of the interplay between the translation machinery and miRNA-mediated repression.
The article discusses the interaction between the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and bacterial symbionts Burkholderia hayleyella and Burkholderia agricolaris. Only a third of field-collected amoebae carry a symbiont, and the study found that natural B. hayleyella hosts suffered fewer fitness costs when reinfected with B. hayleyella, indicating that they have evolved mechanisms to tolerate their symbiont. The article also discusses the complexity and fluidity of symbiotic relationships, with symbiotic associations fluctuating along a mutualism-to-parasitism continuum. The study found that B. hayleyella is most detrimental for D. discoideum hosts in general, but is most costly to those first exposed to it in the lab, and that native hosts have evolved mechanisms to tolerate specific acquired symbionts.
Scientists have discovered that maternal defense in rats is controlled by oxytocin, a hormone that suppresses the self-defense response known as freezing. When the mothers were exposed to a conditioned threat in the presence of their pups, they spent most of their time in close contact with their offspring, rather than hiding or attacking a predator. The study found that blocking oxytocin signal prevented maternal freezing and prevented the mother's pups from learning about the threat. The research suggests that oxytocin is required to suppress maternal freezing and to allow active pup protection, which is crucial for pup threat learning.
A study used whole genome population sequencing of Atlantic and Baltic herring to understand genetic factors behind ecological adaptation, speciation and sustainable population management. The study revealed almost 500 independent loci associated with a recent niche expansion from marine to brackish waters and more than 100 independent loci showing genetic differentiation between spring- and autumn-spawning populations irrespective of geographic origin. The study also found that both coding and non-coding changes contribute to adaptation and identified haplotype blocks associated with genetic differentiation. The average nucleotide diversity was estimated to be one heterozygous site per 309 bp, indicating a population expansion, and the effective population size minimum occurred at around one to two million years ago after the onset of the Quaternary ice age. The study also estimated the split between Atlantic and Pacific herring to about 2.2 million years ago based on mtDNA cytochrome B sequence divergence.
The HIV-1 accessory protein, Vpu, suppresses antiviral immune responses by inhibiting activation of the transcription factor NF-κB. This immunosuppressive activity is independent of Vpu's ability to counteract the host restriction factor and innate sensor tetherin, but rather requires an arginine residue in its cytoplasmic domain. Vpu preferentially suppresses the expression of NF-κB target genes involved in adaptive and innate immune responses, as well as antigen processing, major histocompatibility complex I (MHC-I) presentation, type I IFN signaling, and DNA/RNA sensing. Vpu suppresses the expression of cellular host restriction factors and reduces the expression and release of IFNs and other pro-inflammatory cytokines from infected cells. Transcription factor network analyses reveal that Vpu suppresses the expression of NF-κB target genes, with gene sets regulated by other transcription factors playing only a minor role.
The role of developmental plasticity in facilitating evolutionary diversity remains unclear. To assess this, the feeding structures in 90 nematode species were studied to see if the appearance of a dimorphism through development promoted evolutionary novelties, and after that became fixed, if it consequently directed a sustained rapid exploration of morphospace. The nematodes were analysed for shape, form, and structural complexity using geometric morphometrics and comparative analyses. It was found that when polyphenism (the production of two or more different phenotypes by one organism) evolved with regard to a dimorphism in the mouth structures, there was a significant increase in mouthpart complexity and evolution rates, giving way to structural novelties. Upon the assimilation of a single phenotype, evolutionary rates increased even more strongly despite a decrease in complexity. The study showed that a macroevolutionary "pulse" of plasticity promotes novelties, and, even after the secondary fixation of phenotypes, permits sustained exploration of morphospace.
The Golgi apparatus has a self-correcting mechanism that maintains cellular homeostasis by inducing bioequivalent poly-LacNAc glycans that help to maintain the function of the galectin-glycoprotein lattice in the face of dysregulated Golgi branching. Galectins bind N-acetyllactosamine (LacNAc) units within N-glycans initiated from UDP-GlcNAc by the medial-Golgi branching enzymes as well as the trans-Golgi poly-LacNAc extension enzyme β1, 3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (B3GNT). Poly-LacNAc may occur on N-glycans as well as O-glycans and glycolipids.
The article discusses the importance of regulating the dendritic spine actin cytoskeleton for neurodevelopment and neuronal plasticity. The article identifies direct palmitoylation of the actin regulator LIM kinase-1 (LIMK1) as a novel mechanism to control spine-specific actin dynamics. LIMK1 palmitoylation is essential for normal spine actin polymerization, for spine-specific structural plasticity, and for long-term spine stability. These novel roles for palmitoylation in the spatial control of actin dynamics and kinase signaling provide new insights into structural plasticity mechanisms and strengthen links between dendritic spine impairments and neuropathological conditions. LIMK1 knockout or genetic mutation is associated with spine abnormalities and cognitive impairments. Palmitoylation targets LIMK1 to spines and anchors LIMK1 in spines. Palmitoylation is critical for LIMK1 function because this modification not only controls LIMK1 targeting but is also essential for LIMK1 activation by its membrane-localized upstream activator PAK.
Researchers have found that the survival of parasitic flatworms called schistosomes relies on stem cells called neoblasts to replace cells lost in the tegument - the outer coat that is crucial for their survival within their host's vasculature. The team has discovered two flatworm-specific zinc finger proteins that are necessary for tegumental cell specification. These zinc finger proteins are similar to those that are essential for neoblast-driven epidermal maintenance in free-living flatworms. The research could be significant in developing treatments for diseases caused by other parasites, such as tapeworms and flukes. Schistosomes infect over 200 million people, primarily in the developing world, and are estimated to cause significant morbidity and mortality.
In the absence of external cues, animals must rely on internal processes to guide their behavior. Researchers studied the spontaneous behavior of larval zebrafish swimming in a homogeneous environment and found that they execute repeated turns in the same direction before switching to the opposite direction. This pattern is achieved through the activity of specific neural populations in the hindbrain, which the researchers term the anterior rhombencephalic turning region (ARTR). ARTR perturbations biased swim direction and reduced the dependence of turn direction on turn history, indicating that the ARTR is part of a network generating the temporal correlations in turn direction. This pattern of swim behavior likely underlies efficient exploration of local environments. Overall, the study sheds light on the neural mechanisms that shape the fine structure of motor output and spontaneous behavior.
Centromeres are crucial for accurate chromosome segregation in eukaryotes, providing sites that recruit kinetochore proteins and mediate spindle attachment during cell division. The histone H3 variant, CenH3, is the defining chromatin component of centromeres in most eukaryotes. However, a recent study has shown that at least four lineages of insects have lost CenH3 independently, with each lineage representing an independent transition from monocentricity to holocentricity. Holocentric insects contain a CenH3-independent centromere, which is different from almost all other eukaryotes. The loss of CenH3 may have been due to the ancient transitions to holocentricity in insects, which obviated the need to maintain CenH3, which is otherwise essential in most eukaryotes. Holocentric chromosomes face kinetochore geometry problems during meiosis, and it has been suggested that meiosis in holocentric species requires unique adaptations that can be used as indications for holocentricity. While most inner kinetochore components found in vertebrates and fungi are absent in D. melanogaster, it has also been revealed that the presence of several kinetochore components in other insects, many of which appear to be highly divergent among insects.
Scientists explored the relationship between chromatin accessibility and epigenetic modifications during the transition between haploid and diploid life forms in Arabidopsis plants. They found that the diploid-to-haploid transition is governed by the loss of certain epigenetic marks and DNA demethylation, which leads to changes in chromatin accessibility and transcriptional reprogramming. Chromatin accessibility also changes in the male gametophyte, with distinct cis-regulatory elements becoming accessible in the vegetative cell and sperm. The rewiring of transcription during these transitions is orchestrated by epigenetic reprogramming.
The growth of plants is controlled by directional growth, with cellulose microfibrils and cortical microtubules playing important roles. The use of a combined experimental and computational approach investigated how RAB-A5c-mediated edge-directed trafficking and CMT organisation at cell edges contribute to anisotropic growth in young lateral roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. The results showed that both RAB-A5c-mediated trafficking and CMT array re-organisation contribute to anisotropic growth and that they act independently but partially complement each other. Surprisingly, the inhibition of RAB-A5c function was associated with an increase in CMT/CMF anisotropy, which partially compensated for the loss of mechanism that maintains anisotropic growth in meristematic cells. The study found that CMTs act as an integration point for both mechanisms controlling cellular growth anisotropy in lateral roots.
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by the Leptospira bacteria, with over 300 serovars that can cause the disease. It is transmitted through contact with contaminated water or soil and has a significant impact on both human and animal health worldwide. The development of a widely applicable vaccine that protects against all strains of Leptospira has been a challenge. However, a recently characterized motility-deficient mutant lacking the expression of a flagellar protein (FcpA) has shown promising results as a live attenuated vaccine candidate. Immunization with a single dose of the fcpA- mutant induced a robust immune response that promoted protection against infection with different pathogenic Leptospira species in animal models. The vaccine was also found to induce cross-protective immunity by identifying a small repertoire of biologically relevant proteins that are highly conserved among pathogenic Leptospira species. The vaccine's effectiveness is dose-dependent and induces anti-Leptospira protein antibodies, which are the correlate of vaccine-mediated cross-protective immunity.
The protein Spc110 in budding yeast plays an important role in the nucleation and organization of micro
Researchers have discovered that male fruit flies leave a pheromone called 9-tricosene, which attracts other fruit flies to food-depositing sites. Using genetic, molecular, electrophysiological and behavioural approaches, the researchers identified that the pheromone activates antennal basiconic Or7a receptors. These receptors showed to be essential to promote aggregation and egg-laying site-selection, hence Or7a is classified as a ‘generalist’ odorant receptor that can respond to many aldehydes and alcohols. The researchers concluded that the pheromone is necessary for depositing at a specific site to modulate egg-laying decisions and aggregation, revealing an olfactory mechanism that links food-odor perception and male pheromone deposition.
The Fulani ethnic group has a lower susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria than other ethnic groups living alongside them in West Africa. Previous studies have shown differences in the immune response of the Fulani to P. falciparum, but the underlying mechanism for their protection from malaria is still unknown. A pilot study has been conducted to examine global transcription and DNA methylation patterns in specific immune cell populations in the Fulani to elucidate these mechanisms. The study found that monocytes from the Fulani have a stronger transcriptional response to P. falciparum than those from the Mossi ethnic group, where over 1000 genes were significantly differentially expressed. Genes involved in chromatin remodeling and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in immune cell lineages were differentially expressed, indicating that the underlying cause is a change in the chromatin landscape. The Fulani monocytes exhibited more inflammatory baseline characteristics and a more activated inflammasome upon P. falciparum infection, which may be contributing to their lower susceptibility to the disease.
Researchers used cryo-focused ion beam milling of vitreous Chlamydomonas cells with cryo-electron tomography to acquire three-dimensional structures of the chloroplast in its native state within the cell. The results showed that the thylakoid stacks and the pyrenoid were connected by cylindrical pyrenoid tubules, physically bridging the sites of light-dependent photosynthesis and light-independent carbon fixation, and  the number of thylakoids per stack ranged from 2 to 15, with a median of 3 thylakoids.
Researchers at the University of California have used proteomics to identify a protein called Rasip1 that is essential for cardiovascular development. The scientists found that the transmembrane receptor, Heart of Glass (HEG1), interacts directly with Rasip1 and that HEG1 is necessary for the proper localisation of the protein, which affects cardiovascular development. The authors also showed that HEG1 recruits Rasip1 to endothelial cell junctions, and that the interaction between the two proteins improves cell-cell adhesion, which is important in the process of angiogenesis. Dysfunction in this process can contribute to diseases such as atherosclerosis and multiple sclerosis. The findings indicate that the interaction between HEG1 and Rasip1 serves as a physical nexus for Rap1 signalling to maintain vascular integrity during development.
The document discusses variations in the expression and stability of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules, which present antigen peptides to CD8+ T cells, thereby inducing immunity to infections and cancers. The peptide loading complex (PLC) is responsible for ensuring the cell surface expression of stable peptide-HLA class I complexes. The study showed variations in HLA-B surface expression levels, half-lives, and receptivity to exogenous antigens, influenced by allele and cell-dependent differences in antigen acquisition pathways. These variations can result in global cell surface stability differences, ER retention differences, and subsequent expression differences in primary human cells. The study used freshly isolated human lymphocytes and monocytes and quantitative flow cytometry to examine the expression levels of HLA-B alleles in a cohort of healthy donors. 244 healthy donors were recruited and genotyped for the HLA class I locus using next-generation sequencing. The study found differences in HLA-Bw6 ABC values across the different allele groups in all cell subsets, with highest expression measured for HLA-B*08:01 cells, and lowest expression measured for HLA-B*07:02 and HLA-B*35:01 in all cell subsets. Differences between HLA-B*08:01 and HLA-B*07:02 are significant in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, but similar trends are noted in B and NK cell subsets.
Cells from African straw-colored fruit bats are refractory to Ebola virus infection because of a single amino acid change in the filovirus receptor, NPC1, which reduces the affinity of EBOV-NPC1 interaction. This adaptation reveals one pathway by which a filovirus could escape from receptor control and suggests that some NPC1 variations reflect host adaptations to reduce filovirus replication and virulence. Our findings suggest that amino acid sequence changes in NPC1 at these positively-selected sites represent host adaptations to resist filovirus infection. NPC1 is a genetic determinant of filovirus susceptibility in bats, and reveals that bats and filoviruses have been engaged in a long-term co-evolutionary relationship. EBOV infection is reduced in African straw-colored fruit bat cells because of a specific molecular incompatibility between the EBOV glycoprotein and the filovirus entry receptor.
This study explores the effects of preweaning paternal deprivation (PD) in mandarin voles on emotional and social behaviors, as well as their underlying neural mechanisms. The study finds that PD increases anxiety-like behavior and attenuates social preference in adulthood in female and male voles. The study also shows that PD reduces the number of oxytocin-positive neurons projecting from the paraventricular nucleus and reduces the levels of the medial prefrontal cortex oxytocin receptor protein in females and oxytocin and V1a receptor proteins in males. The study finds that intra-prelimbic cortical oxytocin injections and optogenetic activation of the prelimbic cortex oxytocin terminals from paraventricular oxytocin neurons reverse the PD-induced changes in anxiety-like behavior and social preferences. The study concludes that PD affects emotional and social behaviors in mandarin voles, in part through the involvement of paraventricular oxytocin neuron projections to the prelimbic cortex.
The ability of animals and humans to adapt their learning rate according to volatility in the environment has been studied, but the underlying neural mechanisms have remained unclear. This paper investigates a metaplastic synaptic model within the context of decision-making networks, where synapses can change their rate of plasticity in addition to their efficacy according to a reward-based learning rule. The study finds that the model captures a wide range of key experimental findings and performs as well as a Bayes optimal model, with remarkably little parameter tuning. The paper demonstrates the computational power of synaptic plasticity and provides insights into the circuit-level computation which underlies adaptive decision-making.
The document discusses how stiffness affects the functions of human CD4+ T cells within the physiological range of stiffness. The results show that stiffness modulates T lymphocyte migration, cytokine production, metabolism, and cell cycle progression. T cell responses are sensitive to both the low and high rigidity range of stiffness. The T cell receptor (TCR) acts as a mechanosensor, and T cells generate forces upon activation and costimulation. The study also shows that the mechanical properties of adherent antigen-presenting cells modulate cytokine production by T cells. The findings reveal that T cells can adapt their responses depending on their mechanical environment.
Clinical trials are underway to test the effectiveness of forniceal deep brain stimulation (DBS) in improving memory in Alzheimer's patients. Forniceal DBS has been shown to positively impact learning and memory in mice with Rett syndrome, an intellectual disability disorder. The mechanism behind how DBS benefits memory had been unclear until a recent study found that DBS upregulates genes involved in synaptic function, cell survival, and neurogenesis, and normalized expression of genes altered in Mecp2-null mice. The study suggests that forniceal DBS could benefit individuals with different neuropsychiatric disorders.
Researchers have identified a tubulin-like cytoskeleton, PhuZ, in a bacteriophage called Pseudomonas chlororaphis phage 201ϕ2-1, that shares the same dynamic instability, polarity and spatiotemporal organisation found in the microtubule cytoskeleton of eukaryotes. Unlike similar structures found in prokaryotes, such as Plasmid-encoded bacterial actin, the PhuZ cytoskeleton has many of the properties of eukaryotic MTs, including the ability to form a simplified bipolar spindle. The PhuZ cytoskeleton plays a crucial role in positioning the viral nucleoid or DNA during lytic growth and, in doing so, contributes to efficient phage production. Filaments were "stably anchored" to the cell pole, and revealed to translocate across surfaces in random directions.
Researchers have found that regulatory T cells (Tregs) can integrate signals initiated by interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) to produce a divergent response. They discovered that simultaneous (rather than serial) stimulation of Tregs with IL-2 and IL-4 enhanced a number of responses, including STAT5 phosphorylation, IL-10 production, and the proliferation of IL-10-producing Tregs. This led to increased inhibition of conventional T cell activation and the reversal of asthma and multiple sclerosis in mice. The researchers suggest that these findings could lead to improvements in the clinical use of cytokines.
The brain detects changes in energy availability to adjust the activity of energy expenditure, particularly through the regulation of interscapular brown adipose tissue (iBAT) thermogenesis. AGRP inhibitory tone to iBAT represents an energy-saving circuit that integrates metabolic interoception and environmental food-related cues, and mTORC1 signaling pathway within AGRP neurons detects these cues, interacting with bi-directional control of iBAT thermogenesis during nutrient deficiency and excess. Activation of AGRP neurons suppresses iBAT thermogenic activity and energy expenditure while increasing locomotor activity, but this can be reset by the introduction of food sensory stimuli.
In a study, researchers aimed to test the effect of audio-visual temporal coherence alone on selective listening. They presented listeners with competing auditory streams and a visual stimulus while manipulating the cross-modal temporal relationships. Performance improved when the auditory target's time course matched that of the visual stimulus. The study found that coherence between task-irrelevant stimulus features can help listeners to select one sound source from a mixture. Previous studies investigating audio-visual binding have focused on judgments of coherence or simultaneity rather than on the perceptual enhancements provided by that binding. The study developed a novel paradigm that was designed to test whether cross-modal temporal coherence was sufficient to promote the segregation of two competing sound sources. The researchers sought to measure a behavioral benefit that could be ascribed directly to the temporal coherence between auditory and visual streams. A response to an event in the target stream would be deemed a ‘hit’ and a response to a masker event would be deemed a ‘false alarm’. If true cross-modal objects were being formed, then the auditory perceptual feature to which the listener must attend should not matter.
In complex auditory scenes, our attention shifts to attend to targets of interest while also being alerted to important objects in our environment. A study was conducted to explore the interaction between top-down and bottom-up attention using natural soundscapes as distractors while subjects attend to a controlled rhythmic sound sequence. The study found that salient events in background scenes significantly suppress phase-locking and gamma responses to the attended sequence, countering enhancement effects observed for attended targets. The study also provides insights into the interplay between endogenous and exogenous attention during natural soundscapes, with both forms of attention engaging a common fronto-parietal network at different time lags. Overall, the study aimed to explore neural markers of how we dynamically deploy attention in complex auditory scenes.
The purpose of blinking is to protect and hydrate the eyes, but it also causes a loss of visual information. To minimize this loss, a new type of eye movement called blink-associated resetting movement (BARM) has been discovered. BARM synchronizes with blinks to minimize downtime of the visual system, and its amplitude is related to the eye's torsional position before the blink. BARM can occur with or without an optokinetic stimulus, suggesting it is a ubiquitous phenomenon. This new eye movement serves a distinct oculomotor demand, resetting eye torsion and reducing downtime of the visual system.
The Hippo pathway controls tissue growth through a kinase cascade. Cytoskeletal tension has been found to modulate Hippo signaling through the Rok-myosin II pathway. Spectrin, a protein at the cytoskeleton-membrane interface, has been identified as an upstream regulator of Hippo signaling pathway. Unlike canonical upstream regulators, spectrin modulates cortical actomyosin activity through non-muscle myosin II. Spectrin controls negative regulation of growth regulators and upstream regulators of the Hippo pathway. In conjunction with the known upstream regulators of the Hippo pathway, spectrin regulates tissue growth. Furthermore, knockdown of α-spec leads to an increase in Ex protein levels, modest increase in ex transcription and an increase in nuclear accumulation of Yki.
Researchers from the University of California have found a new way to attack the malaria parasite, by targeting the RhopH complex, a multi-protein structure which is involved in both the invasion of erythrocytes and nutrient uptake during its lifecycle. The RhopH complex is one of a number of proteins which infect erythrocytes in humans and other animals; the uderstanding of its function has not been detailed. The research discovered that the RhopH2 and RhopH3 genes are essential to the parasite's survival; RhopH3 drives erythrocyte invasion, whilst RhopH2 and RhopH3 are needed to create the parasite's nutrient channel. The complex's critical functions and stage-specific trafficking make it an ideal therapeutic target. 
Contrary to previous theories, new research indicates that intrinsic hyperexcitability is an unlikely cause of motoneuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Rather than becoming hyperexcitable, the most vulnerable motoneurons in ALS mice become hypoexcitable and are unable to fire repetitively prior to degeneration. This loss of function occurs before denervation of the neuromuscular junctions and is indicative of early degeneration. The vulnerable motoneurons that are most likely to degenerate are those of the largest motor units that innervate fast-contracting and fatigable muscle fibers. The research also identified C-type lectin chondrolectin as a marker for Fast-type motoneurons that disappear over the course of ALS progression. The overall conclusion is that the intrinsic excitability of motoneurons is unlikely to be the cause of motoneuron degeneration in ALS.
Birds have four types of cone photoreceptors that enable color vision, each with a specific peak sensitivity to different wavelengths of light. However, the short-wavelength sensitivity in violet-sensitive species (VS) and the ultraviolet-sensitive species (UVS) have evolved separately at least 14 times, keeping the sensitivity of the photoreceptors evenly spaced. Scientists discovered this is possible because the SWS2 cone spectral tuning is mediated by modulating the ratio of two apocarotenoids in the cell membrane. Different mechanisms of spectral tuning, including changes in filtering of the C-type oil droplet and shifts in the SWS1 opsin, are coordinated to ensure even sampling of the visible spectrum for optimal color discrimination.
The document outlines a study on songbirds and how they use auditory feedback to learn and maintain their songs. The study looked at the song pre-motor nucleus HVC, which receives auditory input and contains neurons (HVCX cells) that innervate an anterior forebrain pathway (AFP), important to feedback-dependent vocal plasticity. The study found that singing-related synaptic activity of HVCX cells is not perturbed by distorted auditory feedback (DAF), but deafening does gradually weaken synapses on HVCX cells, meaning they integrate feedback only at subthreshold levels during singing. The study supports a model in which the AFP accesses feedback independent of HVC. The study also tested whether singing-related synaptic inputs to HVCX cells encode auditory information by perturbing auditory feedback during singing, but found that singing-related action potentials of HVCX neurons are insensitive to DAF.
A mouse study has revealed a link between dysregulation of SK channels and activity of serotonin neurons in a lifelong stress paradigm, hinting that the channels could provide a target for developing novel therapies for mood disorders. The study by scientists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology focused on serotonin neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus, which are critical to mood regulation. Mice were put into isolation to test the role played by SK channels, and it was found that inhibition of upregulated SK3 channels enabled the restoration of normal excitability in isolated mice.
Cancer is caused by mutations in DNA, and CpG dinucleotides are the main mutational hot spot in most cancers. The C>T mutation rate in CpG sites has been related to an epigenetically modified base called 5-methylcytosine (5mC) which plays a role in transcription silencing. Tissue specific 5hmC patterns in brain, kidney and blood correlate with lower regional CpG>T mutation frequency in cancers originating in the respective tissues. 5hmC is associated with an up to 53% decrease in the frequency of C>T mutations in a CpG context compared to 5mC. The effect of 5hmC on mutational processes is still poorly understood, but it has been suggested that 5hmC plays a role in de-methylation via ineffective re-methylation after replication or directly by thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG).
The study examines how neurons regulate integral membrane proteins in their dendritic arbors without the Golgi apparatus, an essential organelle for conventional secretory trafficking. The researchers define the dendritic trafficking itinerary for synaptic molecules in rat cortical neurons and observe that specific secretory cargo is locally trafficked in dendrites through a specialized trafficking network of recycling endosomes (REs) located in dendrites and spines. The researchers highlight the importance of this trafficking network, which is crucial for neuronal dendrite development, maintenance and plasticity. The study also examines the identity and spatial distribution of organelles involved in the secretory trafficking network and presents evidence of cargo flux through the organelles sensitive to temperature. Overall, the research supports a novel GA-independent mode of local trafficking in dendrites through the satellite secretory network defined by the ERGIC and RE networks.
The depletion of CD301b+ DCs, a type of dendritic cell, resulted in an increase in T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, germinal center B cells and antibody responses to protein antigens, even without adjuvants. CD301b+ DCs express high levels of the inhibitory receptor PD-1 and its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, which seem to play a role in Tfh suppression. Blocking PD-L1 at the time of vaccination enhanced Tfh, germinal center B and antibody responses. The results suggest that CD301b+ DCs play a role in blocking autoantibody generation and have implications for vaccine design and autoimmunity.
The production of ribosomes is essential for cell growth, but disruptions to ribosome biogenesis can lead to heterogeneous phenotypes. Challenges to ribosome biogenesis, such as imbalances in the synthesis of ribosomal proteins and RNA, lead to rapid aggregation of newly synthesized orphan ribosomal proteins and compromise essential cellular processes. This results in the acute loss of proteostasis, which can be alleviated by activating the proteostasis network. The authors propose that ribosome assembly is a key vulnerability of proteostasis maintenance in proliferating cells that may be compromised by diverse genetic, environmental, and xenobiotic perturbations that generate orphan ribosomal proteins. The authors used fast-acting chemical-genetic tools in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to rapidly and specifically disrupt various stages of ribosome assembly and determined that cells experience a rapid collapse of protein folding homeostasis that independently impacts cell growth. In response, cells launch an adaptive proteostasis response that is Hsf1-dependent, consisting of upregulation of chaperone and degradation machinery, which is required for adapting to ribosomal protein assembly stress.
Researchers have discovered a new population of innate immune cells called innate myeloidlymphoblastoid effector cells (IMLECs) that are generated when the Rptor gene is deleted in mouse hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These IMLECs have traits of both myeloid and lymphoid cells and express high levels of pattern-recognition receptors, making them broad responders to TLR ligands and causing systemic inflammation. The researchers identified a unique gene expression signature and a positive marker for IMLEC, which is PD-L1. The study highlights the role of the Raptor/mTORC1 pathway in regulating innate immune tolerance and preventing self-destruction, and suggests a new mechanism for immune tolerance in innate immunity.
A study conducted on Drosophila larvae reveals that postmitotic tissues are unable to replace damaged cells, but rely on buffering mechanisms to prevent tissue disintegration, and that the Ras/MAPK pathway can be activated to induce hypertrophy. The study identifies a genuine tissue-autonomous immune response which prevents recognition of the stressed tissue by the cellular immune response and allows for the unrestricted growth of hypertrophic salivary glands. The immune effector and antimicrobial peptide Drosomycin inhibits a feedback-loop in the JNK-pathway, preventing the induction of programmed cell death. The study highlights the interactive nature of immune and stress responses and identifies a novel immune mechanism that regulates hypertrophic growth and adaptation to accumulating stress in larval SGs.
SLC26A9 is a membrane-transport protein that plays important roles in airway surface hydration and gastric acid production. It has been proposed as a therapeutic target for treating complications associated with cystic fibrosis and other airway and gastrointestinal tract diseases. However, no high-resolution structures have yet been reported for SLC26A9 or any other eukaryotic SLC26 family member. To address this gap, the authors of this study present cryo-electron microscopy structures of dimeric murine Slc26a9, which reveal an unusual mode of oligomerization relying predominantly on the cytosolic STAS domain. They also provide detailed functional characterizations of Slc26a9 in terms of its transport activity and substrate preference, showing that it mediates uncoupled chloride transport with negligible bicarbonate or sulfate permeability. This study thus provides a structural foundation for the understanding of the entire SLC26 family and potentially facilitates their therapeutic exploitation.
The inability of cells to adapt to increased environmental tonicity can lead to inflammation and pathogenesis, with the Rel family of transcription factors TonEBP and NF-κB p65 playing critical roles in the switch from osmoadaptive homeostasis to inflammation. PACT-mediated PKR kinase activation has been identified as a marker of the termination of adaptation and initiation of inflammation, inhibiting the interaction between NF-κB c-Rel and TonEBP essential for the increased expression of TonEBP-dependent osmoprotective genes, resulting in enhanced proinflammatory gene expression. Inhibiting PACT-PKR signaling may prove a novel target for alleviating stress-induced inflammatory diseases.
The document discusses the process of neurotransmitter release at synapses and the importance of compensatory retrieval of membranes and vesicular proteins to sustain synaptic transmission. The study focuses on the calyx of Held synapse and uses capacitance measurements and pH-imaging via a pH-sensitive vesicular protein marker to compare the retrieval kinetics of membranes and vesicular proteins. The study identifies two distinct endocytotic pathways and different recycling mechanisms for membranes and vesicle proteins. The importance of proper endocytotic retrieval for the maintenance of synaptic transmission is discussed. The study also discusses the use of the cypHer5E fluorophore as an exo-endocytosis reporter and simultaneous measurements of membrane retrieval and vesicle protein retrieval.
Cell-to-cell variability in gene expression is a fundamental aspect of cellular processes. However, it is difficult to distinguish intrinsic noise from extrinsic noise from transcriptomic measurements alone. The present study proposes a new approach, the "pathway-reporter" method, which uses multiple generic reporters from the same biochemical pathway to infer magnitudes of intrinsic and extrinsic transcriptional noise, identifying sources of heterogeneity. The method compares favorably to the well-established but challenging dual-reporter method. The study also mathematically proves that it is generally impossible to identify the sources of variability and transcription dynamics from observed transcript abundance distributions alone. The proposed method provides a widely applicable generalization and simplification of the dual-reporter approach. The study verifies the proposed noise decomposition on detailed models of gene transcription, incorporating salient features of the cell cycle, such as gene replication, dosage compensation, binomial partitioning of products due to cell division, and cell-cycle length variability.
A new layer of COX-2 transcriptional regulation has been discovered in cells relevant to human tumorigenesis. The chromatin boundary/insulator factor CTCF establishes an open chromatin domain and induces expression of a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) within the upstream promoter region of COX-2. The lncRNA associates with repressive subunit of NF-κB p50 and occludes it from the COX-2 promoter, potentially facilitating interaction with activation-competent NF-κB p65/p50 dimers. This enables recruitment of the p300 histone acetyltransferase, a domain-wide increase in histone acetylation, and assembly of RNA Polymerase II initiation complexes. PACER is the non-coding RNA in question and is a new potential target for COX-2-modulation in inflammation and cancer.
During development of the Drosophila central nervous system, mutual inhibition among groups of neighbouring postmitotic neurons uses Notch signalling to regulate the robustness of axon target choice in a non-deterministic neuronal circuit, according to a new study. The loss of Notch in postmitotic neurons can modulate an axon's target choice, leading to coinnervation by multiple axons. Mutual inhibition of axonal target choice ensures reproducible nerve patterns. For Notch, the most well-established function in neural development is the selection of neural progenitor cells via a process termed mutual or lateral inhibition.
A new study has found that sarcoma growth can be halted by targeting the cell’s non-essential amino acids, specifically asparagine. Researchers found that the enzyme asparagine synthetase (ASNS) is a key factor in allowing the cancer to grow, meaning that inhibiting it can slow tumour progression. The researchers tested this theory in mice and human cancer cell lines, with success in each one. While the scientists said that more research is needed to determine the exact impact of depriving sarcoma cells of asparagine, they did say that such a deprivation could be a promising treatment option.

Lipids can regulate the conformation of membrane receptors through specific interactions, but the atomic-scale mechanism is not known. Researchers have now shown how specific lipids, in particular cholesterol, bind to the human β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR), affecting its conformational variability and the receptor's ability to respond to signals in an allosteric fashion. The mechanism is based on cholesterol binding at specific high-affinity sites located near the transmembrane helices 5-7 of the receptor. The research used extensive atomistic simulations to show that cholesterol concentrations of around 10 mol% have a significant impact on the conformational distribution of β2AR. The findings suggest that lipid modulation holds great potential for drug discovery.
The Notch pathway is important for development and is regulated in various ways, such as through ligand production, endocytosis and degradation. Notch is activated when it receives a stimulus from a Delta-Serrate ligand in an adjacent cell, leading to downstream developmental events. However, Notch can also be activated in a ligand-independent manner, which has not been explored in relation to cis-expressed ligands. In the Drosophila egg chamber model, it was found that follicle cells without cis- and trans-ligands can still enter the endocycle stage of oogenesis, and that Notch is still required for the mitotic-to-endocycle switch. When expressing only Notch, without ligands, in Drosophila S2 cells, Notch activation occurred and it was reduced when a form of Ser that only cis-inhibits was co-transfected. These results suggest that cis-inhibition is efficient in blocking accidental Notch activity in the absence of ligands.
The study presents a genome-wide analysis of translation during the blood stage development of the parasite P. falciparum. Ribosome profiling was used to measure genome-wide translation through five stages of the parasite development cycle. The study found that transcription and translation are tightly coupled, with overt translational control occurring for less than 10% of the transcriptome. The translationally regulated genes are associated with merozoite egress function, and the accumulation of ribosomes on 5′ leaders is a common transcript feature. This study sheds light on the molecular physiology of the parasite and adds significantly to our understanding of P. falciparum gene expression by linking transcriptional and translational dynamics throughout the blood stages.
The T-box3 gene is important in limb development and mutations in humans can cause severe limb malformations and birth defects. The mechanisms by which the T-box3 gene regulates limb development are not well understood. This study found that the T-box3 gene is required at multiple stages of mouse limb development and has distinct molecular functions in different tissue compartments. Loss of T-box3 in anterior tissue results in preaxial polydactyly, while loss in posterior tissue causes digit loss. T-box3 is present in primary cilia where it interacts with Kif7 and regulates Gli3 stability and processing. Mutations in TBX
The concept of herd immunity, which limits the spread of a pathogen among susceptible hosts, has been studied extensively in eukaryotes but not much in bacteria. This study focuses on the role of herd immunity in phage epidemics in structured and unstructured Escherichia coli populations. The study develops a mathematical model that quantifies how herd immunity is affected by spatial population structure, bacterial growth rate, and phage replication rate. The findings suggest that herd immunity may be important in bacterial communities, allowing for stable coexistence of bacteria and their phages and the maintenance of polymorphism in bacterial immunity. The study demonstrates that bacterial populations can exhibit herd immunity in homogeneous liquid environments and that spatially structured bacterial populations provide a more fine-grained measure of herd immunity.
Rhomboid proteases are a type of intramembrane protease that have evolved to regulate cellular signalling networks. Although they cleave substrates in a site-specific manner, the molecular basis of this specificity is unclear. A new study has now revealed that membrane immersion, which is unique to these proteases, allows substrates to be identified in a fundamentally different way, using dynamic transmembrane segments rather than sequence-specific binding. The membrane imposes constraints that limit proteolysis and enables the proteases to detect and respond to substrates that are located only in the hydrophobic environment. The study also showed that manipulating substrate and gate dynamics in living cells can shift cleavage sites in a manner correlated with a membrane-and-helix-exit propensity scale.
Carboxysomes are bacterial organelles that encapsulate enzymes important for the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle. The spatial organization of carboxysomes has been linked to a ParA-like protein called McdA. A new study identifies a protein called McdB that localizes to carboxysomes and drives the oscillatory patterning of McdA on the nucleoid to promote carboxysome positioning. The study proposes that McdA and McdB are a previously unknown class of self-organizing proteins that use a Brownian-ratchet mechanism to position carboxysomes, rather than a cytoskeletal system. This suggests new insights into the spatial organization of protein mega-complexes and organelles in bacteria.
A study has found that rapid sex-specific adaptation can occur in less than 100 generations in response to environmental change. The study showed sex-specific changes in gene expression, metabolic phenotypes, and behavior in Drosophila populations exposed to a novel temperature regime. The study suggests that altered sex-biased gene regulation, rather than new mutations, is the driver of rapid sex-specific adaptation. The study has important implications for gender-aware medical treatments. A link between changes in gene expression and higher-level phenotypes is suggested by the observation that these laboratory populations experienced a significant decrease in fat content only in females but not in males.
Researchers have found that the motor cortex (M1) – which is considered to lack a distinct layer 4 (L4) – contains pyramidal neurons with input-output circuits like those of L4 neurons in sensory areas, and these neurons have been termed M1-L4 neurons. The M1-L4 neurons were found to have pyramidal-type dendritic arbors, local ramification axons but morphologically uniform. M1 was believed to lack layer 4; hence, this finding questions this traditional belief. The study also suggests that M1-L4 neurons receive strong thalamocortical input from the motor thalamic nuclei, primarily the ventrolateral nucleus (VL) and that M1-L4 neurons project largely unidirectionally to L2/3 pyramidal neurons. Furthermore, these neurons have relatively weak long-range corticocortical inputs and outputs.
The article describes a study that characterizes the function and distribution of the ASH1 and SET-2 methyltransferases, enzymes that add methyl groups to the histone H3 at lysine 36 (H3K36me) in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa. While SET-2 catalyzes H3K36me at active genes, ASH1 catalyzes H3K36me at inactive genes for their repression. The study also shows that ASH1-marked chromatin can be further modified by methylation of H3K27 and that ASH1 catalytic activity modulates the accumulation of H3K27me2/3 both positively and negatively. The article also discusses the significance of H3K36me in the regulation of genomic processes such as transcription, alternative splicing, and DNA replication and repair, as well as its association with cancer.
The structure and function of mechanosensitive channels, which are present in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, are important as they may be potential targets for antibiotics. The bacterial mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) has previously been crystallized in the closed form and it has been shown that it consists of a pentamer made up of five identical subunits. The channel opens via two models, the helix-tilt model or barrel-stave model, and it is uncertain which model is correct. In this study, the authors used a ‘virtual sorting’ single-molecule fluorescence energy transfer to determine how the transmembrane helices in MscL in Escherichia coli move when opening. They also determined that the open pore reaches 2.8 nm in diameter and that MscL most likely opens via the helix-tilt model.
This research found that the spontaneous firing of pyramidal neurons in rat cortical layers increases in irregularity as the animal transitions from anesthetized to awake, and assembles into scale-invariant avalanches at the group level. This phenomenon, known as neuronal avalanches, delineates functional networks and modulates responses to sensory input, and is crucial in understanding the dynamical constraints that determine coordinated neuronal group activity at rest in the awake state. The findings demonstrate that neuronal avalanches are linked to the global physiological state of wakefulness and that cortical resting activity organizes as avalanches from firing of local pyramidal neuron groups to global population activity.
The study suggests that primary cilia, vital signaling structures in most cells including neurons, play an important role in adult brain function and the maintenance of certain neural networks. By showing that conditional knockout of Tau tubulin kinase 2 (TTBK2), a critical regulator of ciliogenesis that is also mutated in a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder, in adult mice results in degenerative cerebellar phenotypes similar to the motor coordination deficits and Purkinje cell (PC) integrity defects seen in the disorder known as spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11), the study provides evidence of the importance of primary cilia in adult neurons. Disruptions to cilium assembly, structure, or function are associated with hereditary developmental syndromes known collectively as ciliopathies, and defects in cilia structure have also been observed in patient samples and animal models of several neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric conditions. The study demonstrates that primary cilia and ciliary signals are important for maintaining connectivity of specific neurons within the brain, and the findings reveal novel insights into mechanisms involved in neurodegeneration in the mammalian brain.
The document discusses the relationship between sepsis, a potentially fatal response to infection, and autoimmune diseases. While sepsis can weaken the immune system's ability to fight infection, it may also contribute to a reduction in autoimmune diseases. The researchers evaluated the impact of sepsis on a mouse model of multiple sclerosis and found that the mice with sepsis had delayed onset and reduced severity of the disease. The reduction in disease severity was due to a decrease in the number, but not function, of autoimmune CD4 T cells. This finding suggests that sepsis-induced immunoparalysis reduces the host's ability to generate antigen-specific responses, even for endogenous autoantigens. The researchers also found that the reduction in autoimmune disease severity was potentially due to a lack of autoantigen-specific CD4 T cells infiltrating the brain and spinal cord. Overall, the study highlights the complex relationship between sepsis and autoimmune diseases and suggests that more research is needed to fully understand this relationship.
Patient-derived colorectal cancer (CRC) organoids can be used to evaluate drug responses of tumour and normal organoids, in order to identify effective drugs for patients. Researchers found that organoids with a mutant RAS gene were resistant to targeted therapies, even when in combination, and that the presence of mutant RAS strongly correlated with resistance to these targeted therapies. Dual inhibition of the EGFR-MEK-ERK pathway in RAS mutant organoids induced transient cell-cycle arrest rather than cell death. In vivo drug response of xenotransplanted RAS mutant organoids confirmed this growth arrest upon pan-HER/MEK combination therapy. The study demonstrated the potential of patient-derived CRC organoid libraries in evaluating inhibitors and drug combinations in a preclinical setting, and also showed the benefits of CRISPR genome editing to study drug responses.
Peptide editing, the selective loading of peptides onto major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules, is catalyzed by tapasin and tapasin-related TAPBPR. The scoop loop, a structural feature in TAPBPR, has been thought to play a catalytic role in peptide editing, but its exact function was unknown. Using a reconstituted system of defined peptide-exchange components and human TAPBPR variants, researchers have found that the scoop loop functions as an internal peptide surrogate in peptide-depleted environments by stabilizing empty MHC I and impeding peptide rebinding. This additional selectivity filter shapes the repertoire of presented peptide epitopes and the formation of a hierarchical immune response.
The hologenome concept proposes that microbes and their host organism are an independent unit of selection. The article explores this concept in poikilothermic organisms, and hypothesizes that their thermal acclimation is connected to their microbiome composition. An experiment using a transgenerational selective breeding scheme for cold tolerance in tropical tilapias found that host genetic selection for thermal tolerance shapes the microbiome composition and its response to cold. The microbiomes of cold-resistant fish showed higher resilience to temperature changes, indicating that the microbiome is shaped by its host's selection. The study highlights the connection between the host and its microbiome's response to the environment.
The Ska complex, a protein complex essential for normal anaphase onset in mitosis, has been found to recruit protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) to kinetochores in order to oppose spindle checkpoint signaling kinases and promote anaphase onset. The Ska complex, made up of Ska1-3, binds microtubules and the C-terminal domain (CTD) of Ska1 was previously thought to facilitate kinetochore movement on depolymerizing spindle microtubules. However, this study shows that the CTD is necessary for binding to PP1 in order to recruit it to kinetochores, and that microtubule binding by Ska may instead serve to promote PP1 recruitment to kinetochores fully attached to spindle microtubules at metaphase. PP1 is required to stabilize kinetochore-microtubule interactions, and recruitment of PP1 to the kinetochore leads to substrate dephosphorylation, stabilization of kinetochore-microtubule attachments, and anaphase onset.
Cyclic G/AMP synthase (cGAS) is an enzyme that initiates type-1 interferon responses against double-stranded DNA in eukaryotic cells. This study shows that cGAS can auto-dimerize without DNA and that substrate-binding and DNA-binding are coupled to the intrinsic dimerization equilibrium of cGAS, with the N-terminal domain of cGAS potentiating dimerization. The study also indicates that the length of DNA regulates binding and dimerization and also the substrate binding and catalysis, and demonstrates that the dependence on duplex length can change according to cellular reaction context. The study reveals a new framework for understanding the activation mechanism of cGAS and suggests a unifying activation model in which cGAS dynamically turns on or off its signaling pathway in a switch-like fashion.
A study using single-cell transcriptome analysis in larval zebrafish brains has revealed multidimensional landscapes of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulators in whole-brain neuronal phenotypes. The study identified effector genes, such as neuropeptides, receptors, transporters, ion channels, synaptic proteins, and cell adhesion molecules, which are important for brain cell classification. The researchers used region-specific and neurotransmitter/modulator-specific marker genes to assign brain region and neurotransmitter/modulator identity for each cell cluster. They also identified a small set of genes specific to each brain region, which could be used to study region-specific neuronal connectivity and function. The study found that glutamatergic/GABAergic neurons with the same terminal features could express different transcription factor (TF) profiles, but those with different terminal features could express the same TF but different RNA-binding protein profiles. Neuromodulator-type neurons that displayed specific terminal features expressed unique TF profiles.
A study by scientists has found that a kinematic synergy involving the planar covariation of limb segment motion holds in 54 different animal species, despite large differences in body size, mass, limb configuration, and amplitude of movements. This kinematic synergy lies at the interface between the neural command signals output by locomotor pattern generators, the mechanics of the body center of mass and the external environment, and it may represent one neuromechanical principle conserved in evolution to save mechanical energy. The study examined the basic kinematic patterns of limb motion in several animal species, belonging to diverse taxonomic groups of birds and therian mammals.
The neuronal DNA-/RNA-binding protein Pur-alpha is important in postnatal brain development and has been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. Pur-alpha binds to both DNA and RNA, and regulates replication, transcription, and translation. This study presents the crystal structure of the DNA-/RNA-binding domain of Pur-alpha, which offers an explanation for the effect of point mutations in the 5q31.3 microdeletion syndrome. Pur-alpha binds DNA and RNA in the same way, suggesting binding modes for RNAs in two neurodegenerative RNAopathies. The study also resolved the molecular mechanism of Pur-alpha's unwindase activity and demonstrated its neuroprotective function. The study contributes to understanding the cellular role of Pur-alpha and its implications in neurodegenerative diseases.
The mTORC1 and ER stress pathways play a role in both colon inflammation and colon cancer growth. Sestrins are stress-inducible proteins that suppress both pathways but have been elusive in their role in colon physiology and tumorigenesis. However, in a recent study, human SESN2 expression was found to be elevated in the colon of ulcerative colitis patients but lost during colon carcinogenesis due to p53 inactivation. In mice, Sestrin2 was found critical for limiting ER stress and promoting recovery of epithelial cells after inflammatory injury. During colitis-promoted tumorigenesis, Sestrin2 was also found important for p53's control over mTORC1 signaling and tumor cell growth, making it a novel tumor suppressor. Sestrin2 downregulation can accelerate both colitis and colon carcinogenesis, both of which are risk factors of colon cancer development.
C4 photosynthesis involves the reprogramming of thousands of genes, and is a product of convergent evolution. This form of photosynthesis reduces the wastage of carbon during photosynthesis, and is necessary for survival in hot, dry environments. In this study, scientists investigate the transition from C2 to C4 photosynthesis through comparative transcriptomic and biochemical analyses of C3, C3-C4, and C4 species. They show that C2 photosynthesis 'pre-adapts' the plant for the C4 system by creating a misbalance in nitrogen metabolism between bundle sheath and mesophyll cells, which requires anaplerotic reactions that resemble at least part of a basic C4 cycle. The results of the study highlight the importance of C2 photosynthesis in generating a pathway necessary for the evolution of C4 photosynthesis.
The study shows that inserting consecutive AAA lysine codons into an ORF diminishes protein expression more than inserting synonymous AAG codons due to ribosome sliding on homopolymeric A sequences that result in premature translation termination on out of frame stop codons. The same kinetic studies in E. coli also indicate that the addition of a single lysine is independent of whether lysine is the first or second amino acid incorporated into peptides. However, subsequent lysines in an iterated sequence are added with considerably slower kinetics on both AAA and AAG codons. As a result, translating consecutive lysines in a poly (lysine) peptide sequence, either on iterated AAA or AAG codons, can lead to substantial kinetic delays in vitro.
The article discusses the importance of actin assembly in synaptic membrane-remodeling events such as endocytosis, which require force-generating actin assembly. Autoinhibition clamps the presynaptic endocytic machinery to limit actin assembly to discrete functional events. The Drosophila endocytic proteins Nwk/FCHSD2, Dap160/intersectin, and WASp relieve Nwk autoinhibition and promote robust membrane-coupled actin assembly in vitro. Automated particle tracking was used to quantify synaptic actin dynamics in vivo. Nwk-Dap160 interactions constrain spurious assembly of WASp-dependent actin structures and promote synaptic endocytosis. Actin assembly affects many physiological processes at neuronal presynaptic terminals. The molecular mechanisms that control F-actin dynamics in space and time at presynaptic membranes are largely unknown. Autoinhibition, which is a property of multiple endocytic proteins, may restrict membrane-cytoskeleton remodeling and endocytic activity to specific locations and times. An example is the F-BAR-SH3 protein Nervous Wreck (Nwk), which regulates synaptic membrane traffic at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. Nwk/FCHSD2 proteins couple two activities: membrane remodeling and WASp-dependent actin polymerization. Intramolecular autoinhibitory interactions between the Nwk F-BAR and its two SH3 domains mutually inhibit both Nwk membrane binding and activation of WASp. The SH3b domain of Nwk continues to restrict SH3a-mediated WASp activation even after Nwk binds membranes. This suggests that autoinhibition allows Nwk-WASp to remain inactive even after recruitment to the membrane, thus keeping the endocytic machinery in a primed but inactive state. Additional binding partners of NwkSH3b may be required to fully activate membrane remodeling at discrete times and locations at the synapse. An excellent candidate for release of Nwk autoinhibition at synapses is the endocytic adaptor intersectin (Dap160 in Drosophila). We quantified discrete actin assembly events at the Drosophila NMJ as a proxy for productive endocytosis. Actin assembly is both a primary target of the endocytic apparatus under investigation and is required for synaptic vesicle endocytosis in all forms. Patches strongly co-labeled with Arp3::GFP, suggesting that actin patches are predominantly composed of branched F-actin, similar to sites of endocytosis in other cell types
The importance of negative selection in establishing T cell tolerance and preventing autoimmunity is demonstrated through the generated T cell specific Bcl2 BH3 mutant transgenic mouse. This model displays enhanced rescue of thymocytes from negative selection but aged mutant mice develop multi-organ autoimmunity and lethality. The study shows that a breakdown in thymocyte apoptosis during negative selection is sufficient to cause autoimmune disease. The study highlights the importance of negative selection in maintaining immunological self-tolerance.
Individualization, the development of unique traits that diverge from the inborn and genetically determined makeup, has practical implications in the clinical setting. However, to study its underlying biological mechanisms, a suitable animal model is required. Here, enriched environment (ENR) was used as a model of brain individualization in female C57BL/6JRj mice. The effect of ENR on a wide range of phenotypes was analyzed in terms of both means and variances. The results showed that ENR influenced multiple parameters and restructured correlation patterns between them but only increased differences among individuals in traits related to brain and behavior. The study concluded that ENR promotes the development of inter-individual differences in specific interactions with the environment, but not in pure locomotor activity. Moreover, ENR increases inter-individual variability in the survival of new-born neurons and astrocytes but not in the proliferation of precursor cells in the dentate gyrus. Finally, ENR differentially influenced various aspects of hippocampal plasticity, while showing that the increased inter-individual variability that was triggered by ENR was specific to adult neurogenesis.
A new study has revealed how humans learn about new environments from scratch. Researchers created a “fog world” virtual reality with entirely new landmarks, of which participants had no prior experience. Study participants moved within the world for functional MRI scanning while researchers tracked their evolving knowledge. The retrosplenial cortex played a central and highly selective role by representing only the most stable, permanent features in this world. Meanwhile, increased coupling was noted between the retrosplenial cortex and hippocampus, with the hippocampus then expressing knowledge of permanent landmark locations and overall environmental layout.
Neurotrophin-3 (Ntf3) and brain derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) are essential for the survival and establishment of neuronal projections in the embryonic inner ear. A study found that, in the postnatal inner ear, Bdnf and Ntf3 are needed for the creation and maintenance of hair cell ribbon synapses in the vestibular and cochlear epithelia, respectively. It was also discovered that Ntf3 had a highly localized effect on cochlear synaptogenesis, and supporting cells were the main endogenous source of these neurotrophins. Supporting cell-derived Ntf3, but not Bdnf, promoted recovery of cochlear function and ribbon synapse regeneration after acoustic trauma. The study used cell-specific inducible gene recombination in mice to eliminate or increase neurotrophin expression from supporting cells or hair cells in the postnatal inner ear. The results indicate that glial-derived neurotrophins play critical roles in inner ear synapse density and synaptic regeneration after injury.
The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway controls the development of many tissues during embryogenesis and regulates tissue stem cells and regenerative responses to injury. Aberrant Hh signaling can be oncogenic and the two transmembrane proteins Patched 1 (Ptch1) and Smoothened (Smo) are implicated in Hh-driven cancers. Smo is a developmental regulator, oncoprotein and drug target in oncology. The extracellular cysteine rich domain (CRD) of vertebrate Smo binds to oxysterols, endogenous lipids that activate Hh signaling. The CRD is required for signaling in response to native Hh ligands, showing that it is an important regulatory module for Smo activation. Oxysterol-inspired small molecules that target the Smo CRD can block signaling by all known classes of Hh activators and by clinically relevant Smo mutants. The cyclopamine and oxysterol binding sites on Smo are distinct and referred to as the 7TM and CRD sites, respectively.
Primaquine is a drug used to prevent relapse in vivax malaria, but it can cause acute haemolytic anaemia in individuals with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd), which is frequently found in populations at risk from vivax malaria. As testing for G6PDd is often unavailable, the use of primaquine for radical cure is limited. A compartmental model of red blood cell dynamics was designed to characterise primaquine-induced haemolysis and predict a safer alternative to the currently recommended weekly 0.75 mg/kg regimen for G6PDd. The model suggests a stepwise increase in daily administered primaquine dose would be relatively safe in G6PDd. If confirmed, this regimen could be recommended without G6PD testing in areas where G6PDd is prevalent.
The article describes a new method for studying gene transcription that overcomes some of the limitations of previous methods. The new method involves simultaneously quantifying nascent and mature mRNA in individual cells and incorporating cell-cycle effects in the analysis of mRNA statistics. The authors use this method to study the transcriptional activity of Oct4 and Nanog in mouse embryonic stem cells, and find that Nanog exhibits slower ON/OFF switching, resulting in increased cell-to-cell variability in mRNA levels. By simultaneously measuring both nascent and mature mRNA, the authors are able to better constrain their theoretical model and estimate the underlying parameters. The article concludes by noting that the ability to map mRNA copy-number statistics back to transcription kinetics is limited by several factors, including temporal integration over the mRNA lifetime, contribution from multiple gene copies, and mixing of cells from different cell-cycle phases. However, the new method described in the article overcomes these limitations and provides a more reliable way to infer the kinetic parameters of stochastic gene activity.
The antiviral nucleoside favipiravir has been shown to reduce viral load in vivo by causing antiviral mutagenesis in a mouse model for norovirus infection according to a study conducted by the Wyss Institute. Noroviruses are a common cause of gastrointestinal infections and there are currently no licenced antivirals or vaccines available. Due to the elevated error rates during the replication of their genetic material, RNA virus populations exist as complex distributions of mutant genomes known as quasispecies. Some nucleoside analogues and non-nucleoside compounds display antiviral activities in cell culture against a wide range of RNA viruses and appear to act via increased mutagenesis, leading in some cases to the complete extinction of the virus population. However, data on whether lethal mutagenesis could be a therapeutic approach in vivo is limited. Although evidence supporting the antiviral ribavirin and favipiravir in cell culture already existed, their mechanisms of action and utility in vivo have not been described. Favipiravir caused significant decreases in virus titres which in some animals led to viral extinction. By contrast, ribavirin showed limited efficacy in vivo which correlated with lower antiviral activity in cell culture when compared to favipiravir. Ribavirin treatment resulted in a threefold increase in mutations while favipiravir led to a five to sixfold increase in the number of mutations per nucleotide.

The study analyzes the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), a quality-control pathway, that targets various transcripts, such as mRNAs with premature stop-codons or short uORFs. The authors used a modified 5’-RACE approach to perform a genome-wide analysis of TSSs in wild-type S. cerevisiae cells and in cells deficient for nuclear and NMD RNA quality-control pathways. They discovered various transcript isoforms that are sensitive to NMD for almost half of all yeast protein-coding genes. Furthermore, the authors found that the low specificity of RNA polymerase II TSS selection generates NMD-sensitive transcript isoforms that carry uORFs or start downstream of the ATG START codon.
The spindle position checkpoint (SPOC) is a mechanism that prevents mitotic exit when the spindle is misaligned. Researchers monitored the interaction between SPB proteins and the SPOC component Bfa1 by FRET microscopy and found that Bfa1 binds to the scaffold-protein Nud1 and the gamma-tubulin receptor Spc72. Spindle misalignment disrupts Bfa1-Spc72 interaction, which is essential for SPOC function, by a mechanism that requires the 14-3-3-family protein Bmh1 and the MARK/PAR-kinase Kin4. Additionally, analysis of spc72∆ cells shows that a mitotic-exit-promoting dominant signal, which is triggered upon elongation of the spindle into the bud, overrides the SPOC. The study highlights the importance of local regulation at the spindle pole bodies (SPBs) for SPOC integrity and the contribution of a daughter-specific mechanism that triggers mitotic exit network activation.
The document discusses the use of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine in the treatment and prevention of COVID-19, despite a lack of convincing evidence of efficacy. These drugs are potentially lethal in overdose and have been the subject of clinical trials. The study analyzes the relationship between whole blood concentration of chloroquine and electrocardiograph QRS duration, finding that doses currently used in COVID-19 trials are unlikely to cause serious cardiovascular toxicity. The document emphasizes the importance of dosing based on body weight and cautions against the politicization of these drugs. An effective antiviral and anti-inflammatory drugs remain a potential key in the treatment of COVID-19, while future prevention trials are expected to report many months later.
The Ciona notochord, a simple axial rod of mesodermal cells, displays planar cell polarity (PCP) that is coordinated by the transmembrane proteins Strabismus/Van Gogh and Frizzled, and the cytoplasmic proteins Prickle and Dishevelled. This PCP pathway is critical for the orientation of cells in various organs and tissues. The study shows that the notochord cells also have anteriorly polarized myosin machinery. The anterior localization of both proteins, Myosin10/11/14/9-myc and MRLC9/12-Venus, persists throughout the elongation phase of notochord cells. Despite previous models depicting the polarization of myosin as downstream of PCP signaling, the study provides evidence for a more complex relationship between the core PCP components and the myosin machinery which act in a reciprocal fashion to promote cell polarization. The study observes that the actin/myosin machinery aids in PCP protein localization and is not just a downstream target of PCP signaling.
Researchers have identified two populations of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in the ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) of adult mice that reside in different, non-overlapping domains in either the dorsal or ventral V-SVZ. The team used single-cell RNA-sequencing to validate their findings and identify two subpopulations of young neurons. They also discovered a subset of dynamically expressed genes that are maintained in the ventral or dorsal lineages. The study provides new markers and territories to understand the region-specific regulation of adult neurogenesis. This heterogeneity is largely driven by the location of the NSPCs within the V-SVZ.
A new study reveals that tumors can hijack nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) to block the tumor suppressor p53, supporting cancer growth and progression. Researchers found that NGFR activates the transcription of p53 while simultaneously promoting its degradation. Cancer cells use this negative feedback of p53 to their advantage, downregulating NGFR to induce p53-dependent apoptosis and suppress tumor growth. NGFR is highly expressed in human glioblastomas and in breast cancers with wild type p53. The study suggests that NGFR may be a potential target for anti-cancer therapies.
The HIV-1 protein Rev controls an important stage in viral replication by directing the export of vital RNAs out of the nucleus. Rev works by assembling with the Rev Response Element (RRE), a specific RNA structure found on unspliced and singly-spliced viral mRNAs. The Rev-RRE complex is exported via the Crm1 pathway. Whilst the individual steps involved in the Rev-RRE assembly process are understood to some degree, how these steps are coordinated to create an export-competent complex is less clear. This paper describes the first crystal structure of a Rev dimer-RRE complex, which reveals that the Rev-dimer is dramatically rearranged when it recognises the RNA, forming a V-shaped topology with a hydrogen-bonded dimer interface that is critical to Rev function. The study also suggests that Rev-RNA recognition is dependent on sequence-specific contacts within the RNA structure.
The evolution of similar genetic traits in both natural and experimental populations suggests the presence of underlying rules that, if understood, could lead to more predictive science. However, identifying these rules has proven difficult due to the stochastic nature of mutation and a lack of understanding of the processes underlying the development of phenotypes. This study focuses on the evolving wrinkly spreader morph of Pseudomonas fluorescens and identifies 13 new mutational pathways, providing insight into the bias towards certain genetic pathways in parallel genetic evolution. The findings suggest a set of hierarchical principles for evolutionary change via negative regulation pathways, promoter mutations and gene fusions, and activation by gain-of-function mutations. The study has relevance for interpreting the diverse array of mutations in humans and provides a model for investigating the underlying causes of parallel evolution.
The proteostasis network is a collection of pathways that protect proteins from misfolding and removes those that have already misfolded. However, amyloids, which are misfolded proteins, are known to be largely resistant to clearance, leading to limitations in the quality control mechanisms of cells. In order to identify such limitations, researchers have investigated the mechanism by which thermal stress cures the [PSI+]/Sup35 prion, and found that Sup35 amyloid is disassembled at elevated temperatures by the molecular chaperone Hsp104. This requires Hsp104 engagement with heat-induced non-prion aggregates in late cell-cycle stage cells, which promotes its asymmetric retention and thereby effective activity. Thus, cell division imposes a potent limitation on proteostasis capacity that can be bypassed by the spatial engagement of a quality control factor.
Researchers have developed a new system that allows for the isolation and identification of mRNAs and RNA-binding proteins enriched in the cell bodies or dendrites of excitatory CA1 neurons in the hippocampus. Using compartment- and cell-type-specific profiling technologies, they precisely defined the transcriptome of mouse hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons and identified CA1 dendritic transcripts with differentially localized mRNA isoforms generated by alternative polyadenylation and alternative splicing, including many that have altered protein-coding capacity. They found that FMRP targets were overrepresented among dendritic mRNAs, and that FMRP regulates ~15-20% of mRNAs encoding synaptic functions and 10% of chromatin modulators, in the dendrite and cell body. They also found that distinct patterns of both mRNA and FMRP subcellular localization enable FMRP to regulate the expression of different proteins within different compartments in a single neuronal cell type.
New research reveals that the cerebellar cortex is not homogeneous as previously thought, but instead has Purkinje cells with varying spiking activity. Purkinje cells are considered to be the sole output cells of the cerebellar cortex, and their activity has been shown in the study to differ between cerebellar modules and to correlate with their expression of the glycolytic enzyme aldolase C or zebrin. The research suggests that zebrin-discriminated cerebellar modules operate at different frequencies, which depend on the activation of TRPC3, and that this property is relevant for all cerebellar functions.
Research has uncovered a family of enzymes – the bacterial autotransporter heptosyltransferases (BAHTs) – which are members of a large group of virulence autotransporters. Using TibC from ETEC, the BAHT specific to the bacterium, scientists have defined the crystal structure of the enzyme and proved that it modifies tibA and AIDA-I. The structure reveals a sugar transfer mechanism and highlights how the dodecamer enzyme complex efficiently hyperglycosylates six autotransporter substrates simultaneously. Autotransporters play a critical role in diverse aspects of bacterial physiology including biofilm formation, proteolytic digestion of host proteins, adhesion to host cells, and intracellular motility. Glycosylation of such proteins is often associated with pathogen virulence and immune modulation.
The synaptonemal complex (SC) plays a central role in meiosis, the process by which the diploid germ cell genome is halved to generate haploid gametes. Researchers have identified a novel role for a component of the SC, SYP-4, in negatively regulating formation of recombination-initiating double-strand breaks (DSBs) via a feedback loop triggered by crossover designation in C. elegans. A study showed that SYP-4 is phosphorylated dependent on Polo-like kinases PLK-1/2, which switches the central region of the SC from a more dynamic to a less dynamic state and negatively regulates DSB formation. Accurate chromosome segregation at meiosis I depends on several earlier key steps including pairing and the assembly of the SC between homologous chromosomes. This research suggests a mechanistic basis for how the switch in SC dynamics and the transmission of feedback regulation on further DSB formation work.
The TAM receptor tyrosine kinases Tyro3, Axl, and Mer are involved in regulating essential cellular processes, but the different activities of their activating ligands Gas6 and Protein S are not well understood. Biochemical and genetic analyses have been used to determine the rules for receptor-ligand engagement and found that Tyro3 and Mer are activated by both ligands, but only Gas6 activates Axl. Optimal signaling requires that both the receptor and the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) are engaged by TAM ligands, and Gas6 without its PtdSer-binding ‘Gla domain’ is significantly weaker as a Tyro3/Mer agonist and is inactive as an Axl agonist. This study shows that a complete TAM signaling module is composed of a receptor, a γ-carboxylated protein ligand, and the phospholipid PtdSer, a tripartite arrangement that is unique to the TAM family. Mer plays an important role in two different settings of homeostatic PtdSer-dependent phagocytosis in the retina and the testes, where Pros1 binding to and activation of Mer alone is sufficient to ensure wild-type levels of phagocytosis. The study also shows that Gas6 activates all three TAM receptors, but is a potent ligand for Axl, and Pros1 activates Tyro3 and Mer, but is inactive as an Axl agonist.
A study of noctilionoid bats has found evidence of multiple, independent losses of short-wave-sensitive opsins (S-opsins), which are associated with the loss of UV vision capabilities. This has been linked to failures of protein synthesis, including transcription, translation and post-translation. The study, which involved 39 species and sequencing of mRNA isolated from their eye tissue, suggests that the loss of S-opinions occurs independently in different lineages. Widespread S-opsin loss was observed in noctilionoids, but was found in non-noctilionoid Yangochiroptera, too. The study highlights the importance of considering all stages of protein production when investigating trait loss, and suggests that predicted visual phenotypes within the body of a particular species cannot always be deduced from genotypes alone.
Cells need to control their size during the growth and division process. It is known that in several types of cells, there is a size threshold that needs to be reached before a cell can initiate division. However, the mechanism by which a cell senses and monitors its size remains unknown. Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco have provided evidence that the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe sense their size based on their surface area, and this is controlled by a peripheral membrane protein kinase cdr2p that accumulates in nodes at the medial cortex as a measure of cell surface area. This new model challenges the previous model that was based on the pom1p concentration gradient as a ruler to sense cell length. The researchers used quantitative imaging and modeling to examine the relationship between pom1p and cdr2p with cell size and found that the previous assumptions of the pom1p gradient model were not consistent with their experimental findings. They suggest that cells monitor their size using cdr2p as a cortical sizer molecule to probe the surface area of the cell and relay this information to the medial cortex.
Plant meristems contain stem cells that are controlled by developmental and environmental signals. In this study, an integrated approach was used to investigate the role of HECATE (HEC) genes in regulating stem cell differentiation in the shoot stem cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. The study found that HEC stabilizes cell fate in distinct zones of the shoot meristem and modulates the balance between cytokinin and auxin responses during cell differentiation. The study also investigated the regulatory mechanisms underlying the increase in sam size caused by HEC1 activation and found a transient enlargement of both the niche and the central zone. These findings provide insights into the mechanisms underlying stem cell differentiation and the regulation of plant development.
Researchers used optic fiber-based calcium recordings of local neural populations in cortex and thalamus to detect neurophysiologically defined slow calcium waves in isoflurane anesthetized rats. The individual slow wave events were used for an event-related analysis of simultaneously acquired whole-brain BOLD fMRI. They identified BOLD responses directly related to onsets of slow calcium waves, revealing a cortex-wide BOLD correlate: the entire cortex was engaged in this specific type of slow wave activity. Slow oscillation-associated slow wave activity is characterized by a waxing and waning of spontaneous neuronal firing arising from neuronal populations in deeper cortical layers. This oscillation is highly similar across cortical regions and species. In addition, slow wave activity, correlated to cortical slow wave events, can also be found in sub-cortical regions such as the thalamus and the hippocampus.
Hominin footprints discovered in northern Tanzania are believed to represent the earliest evidence of hominins walking on two legs. The footprints were found at Laetoli and belong to two individuals who walked in the same direction as the three discovered at the same site in 1978. Researchers believe the new footprints date back 3.66m years and show evidence of considerable size variation between individuals. The find could provide valuable insights into bipedalism, sexual dimorphism and body size during this period in the evolution of hominins.
A new study shows that beneficial soil fungi use lipids from host plants for their growth and that such plants reallocate up to 20% of photosynthates to feed these symbiotic fungi. This dependency is different from earlier thought, that  AM fungi can produce fatty acids only inside the host using sugars as precursors for the lipid biosynthesis. Arbuscular mycorrhiza ( AM ) is a common symbiosis between most land plants and fungi of the Glomeromycota, to provide mineral nutrients to the plant. These results challenge previous assumptions about carbon allocation in  AM-and suggest that manipulation of plants' lipid metabolism could enhance fungal colonization and in turn, plant growth.
The establishment and maintenance of planar cell polarity (PCP) relies on the Frizzled and Dachsous-Fat pathways, both of which include distinct components, but share common features. The molecules act differently, but long-range information is provided by Ds-Fat pathway through tissue-wide Ds and Fj gradients, and the Fz pathway establishes robust polarity that can propagate locally. The Pk-Sple locus could connect PCP pathways through an influence on microtubule orientation. Recent studies suggest that the Ds-Fat PCP and Frizzled pathways are connected by Spiny-legs isoform of the Prickle-Spiny-legs locus. Components of both pathways are required for the normal distal orientation of wing hairs. Sple localization is identified as a key mechanism by which the Ds-Fat pathway coordinates with Fz to influence PCP.
When proteasome activity is compromised, Nrf1 escapes degradation and upregulates the expression of all proteasome subunit genes in a concerted manner in human cells. The processing enzyme for Nrf1 is obscure. The aspartyl protease DNA-damage inducible 1 homolog 2 (DDI2) is required to cleave and activate Nrf1. DDI2 is involved in conversion of cytosolic Nrf1 to the active form. The protease activity of DDI2 is necessary for Nrf1 processing and its transcriptional activity. The UBL domain plays some role in the cleavage. The protease activity of DDI2 is required for cleavage of Nrf1. DDI2 is a potential drug target for increasing the efficacy of proteasome inhibition in cancer treatment.
The article discusses the use of Mendelian randomization to estimate the effects of intelligence and educational attainment on various health, socioeconomic, and longevity outcomes. While intelligence and education are strongly correlated, this approach can help distinguish between their respective causal effects. The authors find that both intelligence and education have positive effects on socioeconomic position, physical and mental health, and longevity. However, they also note that the pleiotropic effects of the SNPs associated with intelligence and education could limit the interpretability of the results.
Recent studies suggest that dopamine is involved in modulating learning and memory, especially in reinforcement learning. Parkinson's disease patients were used as subjects to investigate the effects of dopamine depletion and replacement therapy on reinforcement learning, memory and consolidation. A model of the basal ganglia offered an explanation for the observed effects of dopaminergic medication on positive and negative reinforcement. However, more recent studies suggest that dopamine's contribution to reinforcement learning may be more related to the expression of learned values rather than the learning itself. The studies also suggest that dopamine may enhance consolidation, improving memory for the learned values. Further investigations are needed to validate or reject these hypotheses, and to fraction the time window after learning where dopamine impacts on consolidation of reinforcement learning could be illuminating.
The process of axis elongation (the extension of the head-to-tail or anterior-posterior axis of an embryo) in Drosophila occurs by cell rearrangements and exchange of neighbours through the formation of multicellular vertices. The resolution of these vertices through the assembly of new cell interfaces parallel to the AP axis occurs in pulses correlated with periodic contractions of surrounding cells. Actomyosin contractility is critical in directing the rate and directionality of the assembly of the new cell interface, as inhibiting it disrupts the process. The study also found that local ectopic tension increases the elongation rate of new edges by over two-fold. The findings suggest that local, periodic actomyosin contractility drives multicellular vertex resolution and promotes the assembly of new cell contacts during polarised cell rearrangements in the Drosophila germband extension.
The CRISPR system provides prokaryotes with adaptive immunity from viruses and mobile genetic elements. Class III CRISPR effector complexes including Cas10 subunits are activated upon target RNA binding, which then leads to the synthesis of cyclic oligoadenylate (cOA) via the cyclase domain of Cas10. The cOA molecule binds to and activates Csx1 or Csm6, enhancing their ribonuclease activity for RNA degradation. The S. solfataricus Csm/III-D complex generates cOA in response to target RNA binding, activating a CARF-domain nuclease Csx1 for RNA degradation. Csx1 is activated by cOA4, and cOA synthesis is deactivated as target RNA is cleaved and dissociates. In addition to CARF-domain proteins, S. solfataricus CRISPR system also has six CRISPR-associated proteins. MazF toxin of E. coli can generate large quantities of linear analogues of cOAs A3>P, A4>P, A5>P, and A6>P, and using them showed that cOA4 is the relevant activator for Csx1.
Researchers have developed an intelligent method for classifying platelet aggregates by agonist type, using a convolutional neural network trained by high-throughput imaging flow cytometry of blood cells. The method enables the differentiation of subtle morphological features of platelet aggregates activated by different types of agonists. Currently, platelet aggregates look morphologically similar, making their classification difficult. This new method is expected to open a window on an entirely new class of clinical diagnostics, pharmacometrics, and therapeutics.
Environmental stress during early development can have long-lasting effects on gene expression and behavior in adult organisms. In Caenorhabditis elegans, exposure to stress during early development results in changes in gene expression that are maintained into adulthood. One gene affected by this developmental programming is osm-9, which is down-regulated specifically in the ADL chemosensory neurons of postdauer (PD) adults, resulting in altered olfactory behavior that is mediated by ADL in an OSM-9-dependent manner. The regulation of osm-9 is mediated by the TGF-β, chromatin remodeling, and endogenous RNAi pathways. These findings describe an elegant mechanism of how tissue-specific changes in gene expression triggered by transient environmental cues can be maintained via developmental programming.
Temporal patterning is a process that occurs during neurogenesis, where neural stem cells acquire properties that change the fate of their progeny over time. This process is conserved across species, and in mammals, both extrinsic as well as intrinsic factors regulate the patterning of neural progenitors in the central nervous system. In Drosophila, temporal patterning occurs in intermediate neural progenitors (INPs), which generate different neurons in a sequential manner. Here, researchers developed a method to isolate transcriptomes of INPs in their distinct temporal states to identify a complete set of temporal patterning factors. They identified odd-paired (opa) as a key regulator of temporal patterning, which represses Dichaete (D) to allow Grainyhead (Grh) transcription and progress to the next temporal state. The researchers propose that Osa and its target genes opa and D form an incoherent feedforward loop (FFL), which allows the successive expression of temporal identities, and uncover a new mechanism controlling temporal patterning during neurogenesis.
A previously uncharacterized isoform of microtubule-associated protein MAP4, called oMAP4, is identified as a key organizer of microtubules in muscle cell differentiation. Depletion of oMAP4 impairs cell elongation and cell-cell fusion. oMAP4 is required for paraxial microtubule organization in muscle cells and prevents dynein- and kinesin-driven microtubule-microtubule sliding. A model is proposed in which the cooperation of dynein-mediated microtubule transport and oMAP4-mediated zippering of microtubules drives the formation of a paraxial microtubule array that provides the critical support for the polarization and elongation of myotubes.
Eukaryotic cells rapidly reduce protein synthesis in response to various stress conditions, which is achieved by the phosphorylation-mediated inactivation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2). However, certain individual mRNAs exhibit resistance to inhibition, which is attributed to the presence of at least one efficiently translated upstream open reading frame (uORF) that represses translation of the main coding open reading frame (ORF) under normal conditions. Ribosome profiling was carried out on cultured human cells under severe stress conditions induced with sodium arsenite. Although there was a general translational repression, the protein coding ORFs for certain individual mRNAs exhibited resistance to inhibition due to the presence of efficient uORFs. The findings suggest that translational control based on the reduced availability of TC is required to actively synthesise certain factors in response to stress.
A study conducted in the eastern US with citizen scientists has found that developed areas have higher or similar mammalian occupancy, abundance, richness, and diversity compared to wild areas. While some species can thrive in suburban areas, conservation of wild areas and preservation of green spaces within cities is still necessary to protect sensitive species and ensure adaptation and persistence in the Anthropocene. The study used 1427 camera traps across two development gradients and four plot types to survey mammals. The findings suggest an evolutionary trend that could be important for conservation in the Anthropocene, and more large-scale studies are needed to evaluate the response of wildlife communities to urban development.
Endothermy, or the ability for organisms to actively produce body heat through metabolic activity, is a defining characteristic of both birds and mammals. This study investigates the origin of mammalian endothermy by analyzing the stable oxygen isotope compositions of some Permo-Triassic therapsid relatives. Comparing the isotope values to co-existing non-therapsid tetrapods, the study suggests that cynodonts and dicynodonts independently acquired elevated thermometabolism, leading to the development of endothermy in the Epicynodontia during the Middle-Late Permian. This allowed mammals to colonize a broader range of environments with extreme thermal conditions. The study also discusses various anatomical and behavioral features associated with thermoregulation and challenges in identifying the timing and selection pressure for the origin of mammalian endothermy.
The management of salivary gland hypofunction caused by radiation therapy for head and neck cancer lacks effective treatments. Inorganic nitrate, found in vegetables, fruits, and drinking water, has been found to offer protection against certain diseases and is actively taken up by salivary glands. The study investigated the effect of dietary nitrate on the prevention and treatment of radiation-induced salivary gland hypofunction in miniature pigs and elucidated the underlying mechanism in human parotid gland cells. Nitrate administration prevented radiation-induced parotid gland damage in a dose-dependent manner by maintaining the function of irradiated parotid gland tissue. Nitrate also enhanced cell proliferation via the epidermal growth factor receptor-protein kinase B-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in irradiated parotid gland tissue, effectively preventing radiation-induced xerostomia. Dietary nitrate may provide a novel, safe, and effective way to resolve radiation-induced xerostomia.
RNA chaperones have been found to act as mutation buffers that enhance organismal fitness in a similar way to protein chaperones. The study demonstrated that overexpression of select RNA chaperones, including three DEAD box RNA helicases and the cold shock protein CspA, improves fitness of two independently evolved Escherichia coli mutator strains that have accumulated deleterious mutations during short- and long-term laboratory evolution. The RNA chaperones were found to promote RNA structural remodelling in the buffering process.
Researchers used high-throughput immune repertoire sequencing to comprehensively measure the landscape of antibody class switching in human adult twins. They mapped how antibodies of every class are created, and found a two-tiered hierarchy of class switch pathways. They discovered that closely related B cells often switch to the same class, but lose coherence as somatic mutations accumulate. The results suggest that class switch recombination is directed toward specific isotypes by a cell-autonomous imprinted state. Dysregulation of antibody class switching has been implicated in autoimmune diseases.
The study investigates genetic differences between fish fins and tetrapod limbs by analyzing transcriptomes and open-chromatin regions. The study focuses on comparing mouse forelimb buds with the pectoral fin buds of the brown-banded bamboo shark. The study reveals a mass heterochrony and hourglass-shaped conservation of gene expression between fins and limbs, and suggests that mid-stage limb development is constrained by regulatory complexity due to dynamic and tissue-specific transcriptional controls. The study also compares the temporal dynamics of gene expression between the bamboo shark fin and mouse limb development and validates the data by analyzing the expression profiles of Hoxa and Hoxd genes. The study finds that the overall temporal dynamics of Hox gene expression are conserved between the mouse limb bud and the bamboo shark fin bud, but some differences in the regulation of Hox genes may exist between species. The study also analyzes genes related to chrondrogenesis and myogenesis and finds that the chondrogenic pathway was partially conserved between bambooshark fin buds and mouse limb buds, but myogenetic regulation showed both conserved and divergent patterns. The study concludes that early and late stages of fin/limb development are more permissive to mutations than middle stages and that the middle stages are constrained by regulatory complexity.
The brain goes through a distinct transitional state during the emergence from general anesthesia characterized by large, slow sensory-evoked potentials that resemble the K-complexes of stage two sleep. This transitional state occurs just before recovery from the unconscious state and is selective to anesthetic emergence. The LPs, or large potentials, observed during emergence resemble K-complexes and are restricted to a specific frontotemporal network of cortical regions. They are primarily observed after propofol is turned off but before the patient exhibits signs of recovery. These findings suggest a novel transitional brain state that occurs during emergence from anesthesia and sheds light on the neural dynamics supporting the brain's ability to spontaneously recover wakeful consciousness.
Bacteria navigate through their environment by means of a chemotaxis system that translates ligand binding into preferential flagellar rotation leading to movement in a favourable direction or tumbling to find a better one. It is understood most fully in E.coli, where the components are located in a single operon. Many species contain an additional cluster of chemoreceptors in their cytoplasm whose structure and function were unknown, but which are essential for normal chemotaxis in some organisms. In Rhodobacter sphaeroides, and Vibrio cholerae chemotaxis clusters, containing two clusters of chemoreceptors, were identified, and found to have a similar hexagonal structure to those in transmembrane arrays. It is suggested that the hexagonal architecture is fundamental to their functioning, and that sandwiching and crowding can replace the stabilising effect of the membrane.
Researchers have determined the structural basis for activation of the cytoplasmic GTPase activating protein (GAP) domain in plexin receptors, which are cell surface receptors that bind to semaphorins and transmit signals for regulating processes like neuronal axon guidance, angiogenesis and immune responses. The active dimer of zebrafish PlexinC1 cytoplasmic region in the apo state and in complex with Rap were studied and it was revealed that the dimerisation induced a large-scale conformational change in plexin, which opened the GAP active site to allow Rap binding, and in turn stabilised the switch II region of Rap, bringing Gln63 in Rap into the active site for catalysing GTP hydrolysis. The research explained the unique Rap-specificity of plexins, where GTP-bound active Rap is a key activator of integrin for promoting cell-matrix adhesion. The Rap protein is also involved in numerous pathologies including neurological disorders and cancer.
Internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) are RNA elements that recruit the host cell’s translation machinery in a cap- and end-independent fashion, and are used by RNA viruses to initiate translation of the viral RNA. IGR IRESs from the Dicistroviridae family of viruses use a streamlined mechanism that is different from other IRESs. The IRES binds directly between the two ribosomal subunits and eliminates the requirement for initiation factors. The IGR IRESs require structured RNA that manipulates conserved features of the eukaryotic translation machinery to facilitate translation initiation. Domain III of IGR IRESs have a single-stranded loop of RNA called loop 3. Previous experiments have shown that mutation or elimination of some bases in loop 3 affects IRES function. In this study, the role of the loop 3 in translation initiation was explored, and it was found that both the length and sequence of loop 3 are essential for efficient translation initiation in IGR IRESs from diverse members of the Dicistroviridae family. Loop 3 affects multiple eEF-directed steps, including both pseudotranslocation events i.e. the conformational change in the peptidyl transferase center.
The N2 strain of the Caenorhabditis elegans worm, commonly used in genetic research, has evolved significant behavioral changes since its isolation from the wild. Mutations in two genes, npr-1 and glb-5, have been identified as contributing to these changes, with the derived alleles conferring fitness advantages in laboratory conditions. However, experiments have shown that these advantages are not necessarily linked to social/solitary behavior, but instead relate to increased food consumption and changes in reproductive timing mediated by O2-sensing neurons that regulate aerotaxis and energy homeostasis. The study highlights the importance of considering pleiotropic effects in understanding how genetic changes lead to behavioral differences.
Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) is a rare and deadly kidney cancer that primarily affects patients of African descent with sickle cell trait. A new study has identified loss-of-function intronic fusion events in one SMARCB1 allele with concurrent loss of the other allele that lead to RMC. Researchers have found that RMC depends on the loss of SMARCB1 for survival and discovered that the ubiquitin-proteasome system is essential for RMC. Inhibition of the UPS caused a G2/M arrest due to constitutive accumulation of cyclin B1. Data shows the composition of the SWI/SNF complex that is similar between RMC and other SMARCB1 deficient cancers. Re-expression of SMARCB1 in RMC cells led to significant decreases in cell viability and may lead to senescence.
Researchers have identified a naturally occurring genetic variant in the Arctic ground squirrel (AGS) that makes the mammal highly tolerant to hypoxia or ischemia, conditions that are generally fatal to most mammals. The variant, called AGS ATP5G1, is critical for AGS's ability to withstand intrinsic cytoprotection against metabolic stress. AGS ATP5G1 promotes metabolic stress resilience by modulating mitochondrial morphological change and metabolic functions. Using a cDNA library expression-based genetic screen combined with phenotypic analyses of cell survival and mitochondrial responses to stress as compared in mouse versus AGS NPCs, researchers identified AGS transcripts imparting ex vivo cytoprotection against various metabolic stressors. They further used CRISPR/Cas9 DNA base editing to determine the functional importance of amino acid substitutions uniquely evolved in AGS and found that AGS ATP5G1L32 causes cytoprotective effects independently confirmed under all three metabolic stress conditions.
The Dna2 nuclease-helicase plays a crucial role in maintaining genomic integrity by processing DNA double-strand breaks, Okazaki fragments, and stalled replication forks. Dna2 requires ssDNA ends and is dependent on the ssDNA-binding protein Rpa. The structure of intact mouse Dna2 bound to a 15-nucleotide ssDNA shows that the nuclease active site is embedded in a long, narrow tunnel through which the DNA has to thread. The helicase domain is required for DNA binding but not threading. A second Dna2-Rpa interaction occurs at the nuclease tunnel entrance and the 5’ end of the Rpa-DNA complex, displacing Rpa from the 5’ but not the 3’ end and explaining how Rpa regulates cleavage polarity. Dna2 has nuclease and helicase activities and plays a key role in maintaining genomic integrity. It is involved in the processing of 5’ flaps during Okazaki fragment maturation, of DNA double-strand breaks during homologous-recombination mediated repair, and of stalled replication forks in the intra-S-phase checkpoint. Dna2 contains a PD-(D/E)XK superfamily nuclease motif and a 5’ to 3’ helicase domain.
The document presents a method for analyzing human plasma proteome, which has high proteome coverage, reproducibility, and potential for liquid biopsy protein profiling. By integrating genomic sequence information, the method enables detection of single amino acid variants and the transfer of multiple protein variants between mother and fetus across the placenta. The method can also detect low abundance tissue-annotated proteins and phosphorylated proteins in plasma, and quantitate differences in plasma proteomes between the mother and newborn as well as changes related to pregnancy. The document discusses the challenges of analyzing plasma proteomics and presents the HiRIEF LC-MS/MS method as a solution, with results showing that it has the potential to both confirm previously described plasma proteins and discover novel components. The method's sensitivity, repeatability, and quantitative reproducibility were evaluated using two cohorts, and the results showed promising outcomes.
The bacterial capsule, which is important in pathogenesis, may be regulated by the cell cycle. Researchers found that the capsule of Caulobacter crescentus is cell cycle regulated, and they identified a bacterial transglutaminase homolog, HvyA, as a factor that prevents capsulation in G1-phase cells. HvyA prevents encapsulation in SW (G1) cell compartment, and its absence confers insensitivity towards the generalized transducing Caulobacter phage. This regulation mechanism could serve to prevent steric hindrance of flagellar motility or to ensure that phage-mediated genetic exchange happens before the onset of DNA replication. Capsules can restrict bacteriophage-mediated genetic exchange, and they are virulence factors in many Gram-negative and Gram-positive species. Capsulation can be regulated by nutritional cues, cell envelope stresses or physical cues, but there are known systemic cues for this.Capsulating could be controlled by the cell cycle, as virulence regulators are recently found to control bacterial cell cycle transcription. By identifying mechanisms that curb genetic exchange, it could become possible to intervene with the spread of antibiotic resistances.
The mechanism by which cells sense mechanical forces and convert them into biochemical signals remains unclear in mechanobiology. Platelets tether and translocate on von Willebrand factor via the GPIb receptor, which unfolds in response to forces, but how these mechanical processes trigger biochemical signals is unknown. The LRRD and MSD domains of GPIb are found to be analog and digital force transducers, respectively, and the area separating these domains transmits force on the bond to enhance the MSD's unfolding, resulting in unfolding cooperativity at an optimal force. These findings may help design principles for a generic mechanosensory protein machine. Platelets can be used as a study model for cell mechanosensing because they respond to changes in hydrodynamic forces and substrate stiffness.
The shape of the relationship between gametocyte (transmission stage of the malaria parasite) density and mosquito infection is highly non-linear, indicating that interventions to reduce gametocyte density need to be highly effective in order to halt human-mosquito transmission. Children have been found to harbour more gametocytes than adults in Burkina Faso, though adults are only slightly less likely to contribute to transmission. Mathematical models of malaria transmission should be adapted to include the relationship between gametocytaemia and mosquito infectivity in order to capture the full impact of transmission-reducing interventions.
Researchers have discovered that skilled motor behavior involves the storage and retrieval of independent neural representations of movement timing and muscle activation patterns, rather than combining them into a unified sequence. The study involved a motor learning task requiring participants to produce finger sequences that included unique combinations of three temporal and three spatial features. Following the training, the participants were tested on sequences with untrained features. Results showed that trained temporal and spatial features transferred to new sequences, and independent fMRI pattern classification procedures revealed that brain regions in the premotor cortex represented spatial and temporal features independently of each other. The findings suggest that higher motor areas are responsible for flexible recombination and efficient encoding of complex motion behavior.
The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria acts as a barrier that allows essential nutrients to pass while preventing the entry of toxic compounds and antibiotics. The OM is asymmetric, with an outer layer of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) or lipooligosaccharides (LOS) and an inner layer of glycerophospholipids (GPL). Little is known about how GPLs are transported into the OM for barrier function, including in antibiotic-resistant opportunistic pathogens such as Acinetobacter baumannii. A genetic screen was performed to find genes important for the outer membrane barrier of A. baumannii. This identified an ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporter complex that promotes GPL export to the OM. The MlaFEDCB system was found to be crucial for OM barrier function in A. baumannii and to be conserved in Gram-negative bacteria. It was proposed that the individual components formed a higher order protein structure. Cryo-electron microscopy was used to determine the structure of the A. baumannii MlaBDEF complex, and this showed that it possessed significant visible features that correspond with the structure predicted bioinformatically.
Researchers have used genetically engineered mice to demonstrate that a central ‘clock’ in the brain plays an essential role in driving normal circadian behavior and synchronized and robust circadian rhythms in peripheral clocks. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus is the primary regulator of daily rhythms of behaviour and physiology in mammals, but the majority of tissues in the body possess autonomous cellular oscillators. Using forebrain/SCN-specific Bmal1 knockout mice, the researchers were able to examine the impact of defunct brain clocks on the organization of peripheral oscillators as well as their response to environmental signals such as light and food. The synchrony and the oscillatory amplitude of the peripheral rhythms in these mice were completely rescued by exposure to light/dark cycles but not fully in time-restricted feeding experiments. These results demonstrate that an intact central clock plays an essential role in driving normal circadian behaviour as well as synchronized and robust circadian programs in peripheral clocks and that light and feeding act on individual peripheral clocks differently in the absence of a functional oscillator in the SCN.
Enhanced synaptic plasticity has been linked to both enhanced and impaired learning in animal studies, presenting a conceptual puzzle. This study found that the recent history of experience and the threshold for synaptic plasticity can determine whether mice with enhanced plasticity exhibit enhanced or impaired learning in response to the same training. Theoretical analysis revealed that saturation may be a key factor limiting the ability of enhanced plasticity to enhance learning. These findings have implications for the development of drug therapies to enhance synaptic plasticity for a range of brain functions and conditions, such as post-stroke recovery or treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.
The document discusses how bacteria communicate and coordinate group behaviors through a process called acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) quorum sensing. The process involves a LuxI-type signal synthase producing an AHL to which its paired LuxR-type receptor selectively responds. Selectivity is important to avoid undesired cross-talk or spurious outputs. The document proposes using covariation within the protein sequences of AHL synthases and receptors to identify selectivity residues. The covarying residues cluster around the ligand-binding sites and are involved in system selectivity toward the cognate signal. The authors engineered the Las system to produce and respond to an alternate AHL signal. The study demonstrates that covariation methods provide a powerful approach for investigating selectivity in protein-small molecule interactions and deepened our understanding of how communication systems evolve and diversify.
The molecular mechanisms that give rise to specific patterns of motor neuron activity, especially during breathing, are largely unknown; this study identifies the role of Hox5 transcription factors in the establishment of phrenic motor neuron (MN) identity and dendritic topography through the regulation of cell adhesion programs. The absence of Hox5 genes leads to asynchronous and erratic phrenic MN firing, compromising respiratory behavior throughout the lifetime of the mice; the reduction in clustering index and dendritic projections coupled with the reduction in diaphragm innervation contribute to respiratory dysfunction in Hox5-deficient mice. Hox5 transcription factors control major aspects of phrenic MN connectivity, shaping the pattern of motor output by orchestrating distinct aspects of MN connectivity.
This study investigates the mechanisms behind reproductive synchrony among migratory locusts, demonstrating that gregarious females display more sexual maturation synchrony than solitary females or olfactory-deficient mutants. The presence of gregarious male adults stimulates sexual maturation synchrony in female locusts through olfactory signals, specifically the aggregation pheromone, 4-vinylanisole. This pheromone induces a time-dependent endocrinal response and accelerates oocyte maturation mainly in young females aged at middle developmental stages (3-4 days post adult eclosion). The study identifies the juvenile hormone/vitellogenin pathway as the mediator of female sexual maturation triggered by 4-vinylanisole. The synchronized reproduction of locusts is essential for maintaining locust swarms and population density and provides insight into reproductive synchrony induced by olfactory signals released by conspecifics in a given group. The study sheds light on the formation of locust swarms by triggering aggregation behavior and sexual maturation synchrony.
The embryonic origin of paired fins in jawed vertebrates has been debated, with some suggesting they evolved as gill arch serial homologues. However, recent evidence has largely discounted this hypothesis. In this study, cell lineage tracing was used to test the embryonic origin of the pharyngeal and paired fin skeleton in skates. The researchers discovered that while the jaw and hyoid arch skeleton derive from neural crest, and the pectoral fin skeleton from mesoderm, the gill arches are of dual origin, receiving contributions from both germ layers. These findings suggest that gill arches and paired fins are serially homologous as derivatives of a continuous, dual-origin mesenchyme with common skeletogenic competence. The discovery of mesodermal contributions to the gill arch skeleton in skates allows for the inference of an ancestral mesodermal contribution to the jawed vertebrate gill arch skeleton.
Schistosomes are parasitic flatworms that infect over 230 million people worldwide and cause over 250,000 deaths per year. The transmission of these parasites relies on a stem cell-driven, clonal expansion of larvae inside a molluscan intermediate host. The proliferation of these cells, known as germinal cells, shares molecular similarities with stem cells from various organisms, including neoblasts of planarians. Two distinct germinal cell lineages have been identified, which differ in their proliferation kinetics and the expression of a nanos ortholog. A vasa/PL10 homolog has been found to be required for the proliferation and maintenance of both populations, whereas Argonaute2 and a fibroblast growth factor receptor-encoding gene are only required for nanos-negative cells. The results suggest an ancient stem cell-based developmental program may have enabled the evolution of the complex life cycle of parasitic flatworms.
T follicular helper cells (Tfh) are essential for effective immunity, but the signals that control Tfh cell differentiation remain poorly understood. Researchers have now shown that the RING domain of the RNA-binding protein ROQUIN has a paradoxical role in promoting Tfh cell differentiation by directly antagonizing the catalytic α1 subunit of the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which is a central regulator of cellular metabolism and mTOR signaling, known to facilitate T-dependent humoral immunity. Loss of AMPK repression by deletion of the ROQUIN RING domain promotes stress granule persistence, which cripples mTOR activity, important in driving CD4+ effector T cell expansion and T-dependent antibody responses. Mice lacking the ROQUIN RING domain have a defective Tfh cell response with reduced IL-21 production and show profoundly defective antigen-specific Tfh compartment. These findings highlight the need to identify new therapeutic interventions to control Tfh cell responses in autoimmune diseases and infections.
A recent claim that humans can discriminate between a trillion olfactory stimuli has been questioned by a new study, which has shown that the method used for the estimate is fragile and dependent upon the choice of experimental parameters. The original claim that humans can discriminate up to a trillion olfactory stimuli was based on a formula that provides an upper bound and the study suggests that the actual claim supported by the original calculation is that humans can discriminate up to a maximum of one trillion odours. The study concludes that there is no evidence for the original claim.
Costimulatory molecules play a critical role in T cell expansion in response to various intracellular pathogens. However, the requirements for these signals vary from essential to dispensable in different infections, and the underlying mechanisms for this are unknown. In a study using mouse models, researchers found that the viral context determined the dependence on CD28/B7-mediated costimulation for expansion of naïve and memory CD8+ T cells, indicating that the requirement for costimulatory signals is not imprinted. The study also found that the pathogen-induced environment, rather than the characteristics of the viral epitopes, determines the requirements of naïve and memory CD8+ T cells for CD28/B7-mediated costimulation. This information could help in the development of vaccines that leverage the different requirements for costimulatory signals in different infections.
The document describes an experiment that investigates sexual selection in a simultaneous hermaphrodite, the great pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis. The Darwin-Bateman paradigm predicts that sexual selection should act more strongly on males than on females, even in hermaphrodites. However, measuring sexual selection in hermaphrodites is complicated as individuals perform both sexual functions throughout their lifetime. The experiment recorded mating success and reproductive success over an eight-week period, and found that male sexual selection gradients are consistently positive. However, an individual’s female mating success negatively affects its own male reproductive success, but this effect only becomes visible several weeks into the experiment. This highlights the importance of the time frame for quantifying and interpreting sexual selection measures. The document also provides a background on sexual selection and its measurement, and discusses the relevance of the study for understanding sexual selection, particularly in hermaphrodites.
Researchers have identified a protein secreted by the vascular pathogen Verticillium dahliae that inhibits plant immunity and promotes virulence. The protein, called VdSCP41, targets key immune regulators in plants, including CBP60g and SARD1, and is able to translocate into the nucleus of plant cells. The researchers also found that GhCBP60b, a homolog of CBP60g in cotton, is targeted by VdSCP41 and contributes to cotton resistance against V. dahliae. The discovery sheds light on the molecular mechanisms underlying V. dahliae virulence and host resistance.
A study has found that an agonist antibody to MuSK, a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for maintaining neuromuscular synapses, slowed muscle disconnection in SOD1-G93A mice, promoting motor neuron survival, improving motor system output, and extending lifespan. Disassembly of the neuromuscular synapse precedes motor neuron loss and is primary cause of motor paralysis in both familial and sporadic forms of ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). This study shows a novel therapeutic strategy for ALS using an antibody format that targets a pathway essential for maintaining attachment of nerve terminals to muscle.
This study investigated the neural fate commitment of pluripotent stem cells, which involves the repression of inhibitory signals and the activation of positive transcription factors. The role of Pou3f1 was studied in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) during the transition from epiblast stem cells to neural progenitor cells. The study found that Pou3f1 is essential for neural differentiation and promotes neural fate commitment of pluripotent stem cells through a dual role - activating internal neural induction programs and antagonizing extrinsic neural inhibitory signals. The study also showed that Brn2, another POU III family member, compensates for Pou3f1 depletion. Finally, the study demonstrated that Pou3f1 is necessary and sufficient for the neural fate commitment of ESCs and of EpiSCs through chimeric mice analysis, RNA-seq analyses and other experiments.
A new study has found that male fruit flies lacking the Heterochromatin Protein 1E (HP1E) sire inviable embryos that undergo catastrophic mitosis. The HP1E gene is a testis-restricted Drosophila HP1 paralog, over 60 million years old, and essential for priming the paternal genome to enter embryonic mitosis in synchrony with the maternal genome, with those embryos without the gene failing to condense and resolve into sister chromatids. The new findings suggest that maternal and paternal control are necessary for paternal genome re-structuring in the early Drosophila embryo, and that HP1E plays a part in this process.
Researchers have developed an optogenetic platform, termed "Opto-CRAC," that allows selective and remote control of calcium oscillations and calcium-responsive gene expression in non-excitable cells by near-infrared (NIR) light radiation. The platform can be used with T lymphocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells in the immune system for wireless photoactivation of calcium-dependent signalling, and to modulate a wide range of calcium-dependent activities. Opto-CRAC has been shown in mice to improve immune system response to specific tumour cells, behaving as a genetically-encoded photoactivatable adjuvant.
The subthalamic nucleus (STN) is thought to be involved in stopping movements. Researchers investigated whether gamma activity in the STN was linked specifically to movement execution or reflected flexible motor control. They recorded activity from nine Parkinson's disease patients as they interrupted finger tapping in response to a stop-signal sound. Gamma activity increased most strongly when the tap was successfully stopped, whereas connectivity between the contralateral STN and motor cortex decreased. The researchers suggest that STN gamma activity may support flexible motor control as it did not only increase during movement execution but also during rapid action-stopping.
The genetic disorder CHARGE syndrome is caused by mutations in CHD7 and is characterized by defects in neural crest formation during embryogenesis. Patients with CHARGE syndrome exhibit a set of malformations, including coloboma of iridis, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital hypoplasia, and ear anomalies. A recent study using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from two CHARGE syndrome patients found that there were defects in the delamination, migration, and motility of neural crest cells. The study also revealed that CHD7 modulates chromatin formation and regulates the expression of downstream genes, including SOX2, SOX9, and SOX10. The analysis of gene expression profiles in CHARGE iPSC-derived neural crest cells showed that genes associated with cell migration and cell adhesion were dysregulated. Furthermore, CHARGE iPSC-NCCs showed defects in early cellular processes, including cell delamination and migration, as well as persistent intercellular contacts. This study shows the potential for patient-derived iPSC models to be used in the study of neurocristopathies such as CHARGE syndrome.
ESKD patients with COVID-19 are at high risk of severe disease. Proteomic profiling of serial blood samples from ESKD patients with COVID-19 revealed 221 differentially expressed proteins, including IL6, markers of monocyte recruitment, neutrophil activation, and epithelial injury. Machine learning identified predictors of severity, including IL18BP, CTSD, GDF15, and KRT19. Longitudinal modelling uncovered 32 proteins displaying different temporal profiles in severe versus non-severe disease. These data implicate epithelial damage, innate immune activation, and leucocyte-endothelial interactions in the pathology of severe COVID-19 and provide a resource for identifying drug targets.
Researchers have created an artificial system that mimics the mechanisms of the actin cortex, which is essential for many cellular processes including cell division, cell polarity and movement. Using this system, they were able to induce symmetry breaking, a process required for polar cytoskeletal dynamics. The team hopes the system will lead to further development of artificial cell models that can move and divide.
The Pif1 helicase is a multi-functional enzyme conserved from bacteria to humans that is involved in many aspects of nucleic acid metabolism. In this study, a novel DNA patrolling activity of Pif1 was discovered, where a single Pif1 monomer anchors to a 3′-tailed DNA junction and periodically reels in the tail with a step size of one nucleotide, extruding a loop. This activity is used to unfold G-quadruplex (G4) structures and is sufficient to unwind RNA-DNA heteroduplex but not duplex DNA. The periodic patrolling activity keeps Pif1 at its site of action in displacing telomerase, resolving R-loops, and keeping G4 unfolded during replication, recombination, and repair. The patrolling is coupled to ATP-dependent ssDNA translocation with a speed of 13±2 nt/s at 20 μM ATP.
The study identifies a microRNA, miR-146a, which is highly upregulated by oncogenic BRAF and NRAS mutations, and found to play a central role in the initiation and progression of melanoma. It increases the ability of human melanoma cells to proliferate and form tumors, and function as an oncogene by activating the Notch signaling pathway. The study also reveals that during melanoma progression, miR-146a can acquire a somatic mutation that enhances its oncogenic activity. BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling is necessary and sufficient for upregulating miR-146a, which interacts with MYC oncogene and recruits MYC to
The factors contributing to the highly drug-resistant tuberculosis epidemic in the former Soviet Union remain unclear. Researchers used whole genome sequencing to investigate the genetic makeup of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) strains in Uzbekistan and found that a single clade dating back to 1974, termed Central Asian Outbreak (CAO), subsequently acquired resistance mutations to eight anti-TB drugs, and made up 75% of all MDR-TB strains in the country in 2005/2006. With the introduction of the WHO-endorsed treatment strategy in 1998, the CAO strains were selected for, and a large transmission network emerged. The genetic makeup of these MDR strains threatens the success of both empirical and standardised MDR-TB treatment strategies; approximately 20% of the estimated 480,000 new MDR-TB patients have access to adequate second-line treatment regimens, and the majority of undiagnosed or ineffectively treated MDR-TB patients continue to transmit their infection and suffer high mortality.
Researchers have shown that hydrodynamic flow and matrix organisation interact to shape competitive dynamics in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms, which are microbial communities surrounded by a secreted extracellular matrix. The research shows that wild-type P. aeruginosa always increased in relative abundance in planar microfluidic devices under simple flow regimes irrespective of initial frequency. This was in competition with matrix mutants. However, in microenvironments with complex, irregular flow profiles, wild-type matrix-producing and isogenic non-producing strains can coexist. The result stems from a local obstruction of flow by wild-type matrix producers, which generates regions of near-zero shear that allow matrix mutants to locally accumulate. The researchers' findings connect the evolutionary stability of matrix production with the hydrodynamics and spatial structure of the surrounding environment, providing a potential explanation for the variation in biofilm matrix secretion observed among bacteria in natural environments.
PP2C phosphatases are important for regulating biological processes, but it was previously unclear how the diverse regulatory domains of these phosphatases control their activity. A new study has identified an alpha-helical switch that coordinates a metal cofactor to control phosphatase activity. This switch is widely conserved among PP2C family members and serves as a platform to control phosphatase activity in response to diverse inputs. The switch is also shared with proteasomal proteases, indicating a possible common evolutionary history. The study focused on SpoIIE from Bacillus subtilis, which controls the activation of the cell-specific transcription factor σF during the developmental process of sporulation. The molecule was found to be active and self-associated in the small cell, which protects the protein from proteolysis and activates the phosphatase.
The study investigates the mechanisms of positional identity restoration in planarians during tissue regeneration, specifically focusing on gene expression patterns related to trunk-tail positional identity. Three genes - ptk7, wntP-2, and ndl-3 - are identified as critical in controlling trunk-tail positional identity, with ptk7 acting independently of canonical Wnt signaling. The study emphasizes the central role of robust pattern control in tissue regeneration and identifies a group of regionally expressed PCGs that jointly suppress trunk identity in regeneration.
A study has explored how well humans estimate surface orientation – specifically, slant and tilt – in natural scenes, finding that human estimation is imprecise and strongly biased with natural stimuli, but precise and unbiased with artificial stimuli. An image-computable Bayesian model predicts human bias and precision in natural scenes, without fitting parameters to the human data. The similarity between human and model performance suggests that human visual systems have internalized local image and scene statistics to optimally infer the three-dimensional structure of the environment. These results have important implications for understanding how vision works in natural conditions.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is a network of clock cells that regulate daily rhythms in mammals, with seasonal encoding accomplished through changes in the spatiotemporal relationships of the cells. A new study into the mechanisms of this seasonal encoding identified that a switch in chloride transport and GABAA signaling is critical for maintaining state plasticity in the SCN network. The ability of the SCN network to encode season is critical for the regulation of a large variety of biological processes, including reproduction, immune function, and metabolism. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism by which seasonal adjustments in GABAA circuits of the master clock serve to maintain sensitivity to changes in day length.
The structure and function of sodium/proton antiporters, which maintain intracellular pH and sodium levels, remains a mystery. However, researchers have now resolved the substrate ion in the dimeric, electroneutral sodium/proton antiporter PaNhaP from Pyrococcus abyssi at 3.2 Å, and determined its structure in two different conformations at pH 8 and pH 4. The ion is coordinated by three acidic sidechains, a water molecule, a serine and a main-chain carbonyl in the unwound stretch of trans-membrane helix 5 at the deepest point of a negatively charged cytoplasmic funnel. A second narrow polar channel may facilitate proton uptake from the cytoplasm. Transport activity of PaNhaP is cooperative at pH 6 but not at pH 5, and is due to pH-dependent allosteric coupling of protomers through two histidines at the dimer interface. This research offers unique new insights into the transport mechanism of sodium/proton antiporters.
Researchers have identified two types of enzymes in neurons that have a significant impact on axon regeneration after injury. Poly (ADP-ribose) glycohodrolases (PARGs) and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) play opposing roles in the regeneration process. Where PARGs enhance axon regeneration, PARPs inhibit it. The study has potential implications for the development of new therapies to treat neurological injuries and diseases.
The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway regulates the expression of 5-10% of non-aberrant human mRNAs by detecting and destroying transcripts containing premature termination codons (PTCs). Canonical members of the NMD pathway have been previously identified in model organisms, but the increased complexity of gene expression regulation in human cells suggests additional proteins may participate. To identify new proteins, a genome-wide RNAi screen was performed against >21,000 genes. Canonical members of the NMD pathway, along with the conserved ICE1/KIAA0947 protein, were identified as top hits. Depletion of ICE1 globally enhances the accumulation and stability of NMD-target mRNAs, suggesting that ICE1 uses a putative MIF4G domain to interact with exon junction complex (EJC) proteins and promotes the association of the NMD protein UPF3B with the EJC. The primary genetic screens responsible for NMD factor identification were conducted in organisms that do not use the EJC to demarcate targets of decay, but the human NMD pathway surveils a transcriptome more complex than that found in yeast and worms, indicating a potential need for an expanded machinery. 

Overall, the strong enrichment of genes involved in mRNA processing and NMD indicates that the expected biology was identified by the screen and that other high-scoring genes are likely to be members of the same processes. Moreover, the performance of the screen compares favorably to a recent CRISPR-based screen for NMD factors. Following the whole-genome screen, ICE1 was validated as a novel peripheral EJC factor essential for EJC-enhanced NMD. Genome-wide RNAseq analyses of ICE1 depletion on classes of transcripts with known NMD-inducing features found ICE1 depletion specifically increased the abundance of PTC-containing isoforms relative to the normal isoforms, indicating ICE1 is important for cellular elimination of many canonical NMD targets.
The retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons of binocular animals cross the midline at the optic chiasm (OC) to grow toward their synaptic targets in the contralateral brain. Ventral anterior homeobox 1 (Vax1) plays a role in developing the OC by regulating RGC axon growth. This study discovered that Vax1 secreted from ventral hypothalamic cells diffuses to RGC axons, promoting axonal growth independent of transcription factor activity. Vax1 binds to extracellular sugar groups of the heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) located in RGC axons to stimulate axon growth. Vax1 is expressed in cells located in optic pathway structures and plays an essential role in fasciculation of RGC axons and formation of the OC.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) release induced by inflammation can lead to changes in breathing patterns and carbon dioxide response, potentially resulting in fatal consequences in newborns such as sudden infant death. Research has established that the EP3R receptor plays a crucial role in regulating breathing and the response to hypercapnia. Brainstem organotypic cultures were used to investigate PGE2 and EP3R’s effect on controlling chemosensitivity and sigh activity, revealing that PGE2 increases the frequency of sighs via EP3R signalling. Sighs have been linked to several pathological states and are necessary for life, with important implications for the ability to auto-resuscitate when breathing fails.
The study develops a statistical approach to assess the risk of a self-sustained HIV epidemic among heterosexuals in Switzerland. The approach uses phylogenetic clustering analysis to estimate the basic reproductive number (R0) and its time trend, and identifies factors associated with higher R0. The results suggest that the HIV epidemic is far below the epidemic threshold, and transmission is diminishing rather than increasing. The study also highlights some heterogeneity between HIV subtypes and suggests integrated prevention measures in Switzerland have been successful for the heterosexual population. The approach used in this study can be applied to other blood-borne and sexually transmitted diseases to assess the risk of a self-sustained epidemic based on viral sequence data.
Researchers have developed biosensors for small molecules using a ligand-binding domain (LBD) based on a method that can be applied to any target molecule. The LBD is fused to either a fluorescent protein or a transcriptional activator and is destabilised by mutation so that the fusion accumulates only in cells containing the target molecule. Biosensors capable of sensing and responding to small molecules in vivo have wide-ranging applications in biological research and biotechnology, including environmental toxin detection and small molecule-triggered therapeutic response. A general solution to small molecule biosensing should be adaptable to a range of small molecules and responses in eukaryotes.
The process of ecdysis, or moulting, is a defining feature of Ecdysozoa, which includes arthropods, nematodes, tardigrades, onychophorans, and related phyla. The signalling cascade underlying moulting differs between panarthropods and the remaining ecdysozoans. This study reconstructs the evolution of major components of the ecdysis pathway and finds that key elements evolved much earlier than previously thought and are present in non-moulting lophotrochozoans and deuterostomes. The study also shows that the entire ecdysis pathway was at least functional in the last common ancestor of Panarthropoda and maybe as early as in the ur-ecdysozoan. The study calls for more detailed functional investigations into the role of individual components during moulting of the various ecdysozoan lineages.
New research suggests that worms have an endogenous opioid system that regulates feeding, acting through a protein called NPR-17 and ASI neurons. Neuropeptides are essential for the regulation of appetite, and the pathways that control feeding are at least partly conserved from invertebrates to mammals. Over 250 neuropeptide genes have been identified in Caenorhabditis elegans, making it a useful model for studying the genetic control of feeding. The study identified NLP-24-derived peptides as possible endogenous opioid ligands and NPR-17 as the opioid receptor on which they act. In well-fed C. elegans, the pharynx's pumping motion is mostly determined by MC motor neuron activity in the pharynx. The opioid system is composed of μ-opioid receptors (MORs), δ-opioid receptors (DORs), and κ-opioid receptors (KORs), and endogenous ligands for these receptors. Enkephalins, dynorphins, and β-endorphin peptides are produced by proteolytic cleavage of large protein precursors known as preproenkephalin, preprodynorphin, and proopiomelanocortin (POMC), respectively. These peptides form the opioid family.
Scientists have used C. elegans nematodes to investigate how ejaculation affects male behavior. The researchers used a combination of mutant analysis, laser ablation, optogenetics, and Ca2+ imaging to identify that the duration of post-coital lethargy was linked to cellular events involved in ejaculation. The research showed that the SPV and SPD sensory neurons and their associated dopamine-containing socket cells can sense the intrauterine environment through cellular endings exposed at the spicule tips and regulate both sperm release into the hermaphrodite and the recovery from post-coital lethargy in males. The study also found that acetylcholine, dopamine, and glutamate-secreting cells are stimulated upon successful intromission and promote sperm movement and release. Finally, the research found that the refractory period, which is a period of reduced mating drive and ability following ejaculation, is regulated by sperm release, allowing males to recover, preventing them from mating multiple times with the same mate and resetting the complex neuromuscular network required for mating.
Researchers have created a modular set of scalable components that can be used to rewire mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling elements, which are ubiquitous signalling elements in eukaryotes that control a wide variety of cellular behaviours, including differentiation, proliferation and stress responses. The components developed by the researchers allowed them to redirect the yeast MAPK Fus3 and human MAPK ERK2 by adding two domains, a substrate and a phospho-motif that can be phosphorylated by the kinase and recruit a downstream effector. By controlling the colocalisation of a kinase with a native substrate, this approach can be used to alter the natural signalling behaviours, dampening signal amplification and yielding concentration-based band-pass filtering.
This study examines the decoding rates of different synonymous codons using ribosome profiling in yeast. Results show that different codons are decoded at different rates in the A-site, with frequent and AT-rich codons being decoded more quickly than rare and GC-rich codons. The study also found that proline is slow in forming peptide bonds in the P-site. The analysis method used also showed validation through positive and negative control experiments. The study suggests that ribosome profiling can give insight into different codon usage and translation rates.
Social group membership and social network relationships predict the composition of the gut microbiome and the structure of genes encoded by gut microbial species in wild baboons, according to a study. The rates of interaction between companions also explained variation in the gut microbiome even after controlling for diet, kinship and shared environments, indicating that direct physical contact plays a part in the transmission of gut microbial species. The study identified 51 socially structured taxa, which were significantly enriched for anaerobic and non-spore-forming lifestyles. As social interactions predict gut microbiome composition in natural animal populations, it is key to understanding how social relationships influence health and the evolution of group living.
The study investigates the maturation-related changes in regional metabolic activity and connectivity in the rat brain from childhood to early adulthood using FDG PET scans. The results show that metabolic activity in the anterior cerebrum increases and decreases in the thalamus and cerebellum during maturation, and metabolic networks including the default mode network (DMN) are extracted. Energy efficiency increases in the medial prefrontal and retrosplenial cortices. Interregional correlation and connectivity strength between spatial components also increase while the energy efficiency of metabolic connections increases. These results may provide insights into normal brain development and the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric developmental diseases. The study used rats as they allow repeated imaging studies, and PET scanners provide quantitative information regarding regional metabolism or synaptic neurochemicals with high sensitivity.
This study examines the long-term fate of growth plate chondrocytes in zebrafish bones and potential mechanisms of their fate plasticity. The study found that growth plate chondrocytes generate osteocytes and adipocytes in zebrafish bones, potentially by transitioning through a proliferative intermediate. The researchers used inducible Cre and long-lived histone-mCherry fusion proteins to reveal the contribution of chondrocytes to osteoblasts, marrow adipocytes, and mesenchymal cells within the adult bones. The study also found that delayed remodeling of the hypertrophic cartilage zone in zebrafish mmp9 mutants correlates with a paucity of marrow adipocytes. These mechanisms are conserved features of bony vertebrates.
A study has shown that 5-month-old infants possess implicit and flexible interoceptive sensitivity, which is important for self-awareness and regulating behavior. The study involved 41 healthy infants, and the results have implications for understanding the early developmental stages of self-awareness, self-regulation, and socio-emotional abilities. The study was conducted ethically, using a marketing company database to recruit parents for the study. The HEP analysis was conducted using a Monte-Carlo random cluster-permutation method, which corrects for multiple comparisons in space and time. The data collection was not performed blind, but statistical analysis was blind to the conditions of the experiment.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) and its receptors, including integrins, impact every aspect of neuronal development. In Drosophila, Tenectin (Tnc), a Mucin-type protein with RGD motifs, is an ECM component required for the structural and functional integrity of synaptic specializations at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Tnc selectively recruits αPS2/βPS integrin at synaptic terminals, but only the cis Tnc/integrin complexes appear to be biologically active. The study also reveals a new function for integrin in the synaptic recruitment of spectrin-based membrane skeleton. Tnc is secreted from both motor neurons and muscles, and it accumulates at the ECM surrounding synaptic terminals. Tnc is expressed in both motor neurons and muscles and appears to accumulate at the ECM surrounding synaptic terminals. Mutations in tnc cause reduction in the frequency of miniature excitatory junction potentials (mEJPs), evoked excitatory junction potentials (EJPs) amplitude, and quantal content.
A team of scientists has created a technique for visualising the interaction of SNARE proteins with Förster resonance energy transfer-fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. SNAREs play an important role in intracellular trafficking by triggering membrane fusion, but locating them accurately is a challenge for scientists. The team developed a novel technique to visualise in real time the interactions of fluorescently tagged SNARE proteins in live cells. The technique was used to monitor the trafficking steps of the secretion of the inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-6 from dendritic cells by mapping the reaction of Stx4 with VAMP3. The FRET-FLIM tool enabled the team to determine that SNARE complexing was a key regulatory step for cytokine production by immune cells.
This article describes how the Crumbs protein regulates the negative regulation of actomyosin dynamics in Drosophila embryos during dorsal closure. Data presented in the study suggests that Crumbs is a key factor in regulating cell junctions, actomyosin dynamics, and morphogenesis. The regulation of cell-cell adhesion and cytoskeleton activity is closely linked to each other. During epithelial morphogenesis, mechanisms controlling cell polarity have to be created to ensure tissue integrity. The study proposes that Crumbs serves as an important apical determinant of epithelial cells, and it is a crucial factor in regulating tissue size in imaginal discs. Data from the study also suggests that the FERM-binding domain motif (FBM) of Crumbs is essential for dorsal closure, and ultimately this motif is classified as stage- and tissue-specific.
The Zona pellucida (ZP) is a glycoprotein shell surrounding mammalian oocytes and embryos that serves functions during fertilization and early development. The ZP is composed of 3-4 proteins, with ZP4 being present in eutherian mammals except for mice. A study using ZP4-null rabbits showed that while ovulation and in vitro development were not affected, in vivo development was severely impaired. The ZP4-null ZP was thinner, more permeable, and had a more disorganized and fenestrated structure. The lack of ZP4 prevented proper embryo sheltering during preimplantation development, suggesting that its structural properties are required for proper embryo protection. The study was conducted using CRISPR technology and gene ablation experiments.
Microtubule asters, radial arrays of microtubules organized by centrosomes, are important in the spatial coordination of animal cells, and play a role in transportation of organelles, cell motility support, and proper positioning of the nucleus, spindle and cleavage furrow. The standard model of aster growth assumes a fixed number of microtubules originating from the centrosomes, but this model does not scale with cell size and it has been found that non-centrosomal microtubule nucleation occurs. A biophysical model of aster growth has been developed that predicts that asters expand as traveling waves, and experiments confirm this prediction. The model suggests that asters in large animals are made up of short, unstable microtubules maintained by autocatalytic nucleation and provides a new way to understand the assembly of polymer networks. Autocatalytic nucleation can overcome microtubules disappearing by depolymerization and allow rapid growth of large asters made of short, interconnected microtubules. This new mode of aster growth also allows the cell to make large asters with varying polymer densities at large speeds.
Researchers have discovered that the haptoglobin-haemoglobin receptor of the African trypanosome species Trypanosoma congolense is expressed in the epimastigote developmental stage that occurs in the tsetse fly, where it acts as a haemoglobin receptor, and not in the bloodstream of the mammalian host like its counterpart in Trypanosoma brucei. The receptor’s evolutionary history has been charted, showing the structural and cellular changes that took place as it adapted from a role in the insect to a new role in the mammalian host. The study also found that infection of livestock by African trypanosomes has a significant effect on food production in sub-Saharan Africa.
A new experimental technique called Tite-Seq has been developed that can measure binding titration curves and corresponding affinities for thousands of variant antibodies in parallel, filling a large gap in the ability to measure critical aspects of the adaptive immune system. Much remains unknown about the quantitative relationship between an antibody's amino acid sequence and its antigen binding affinity. Tite-Seq eliminates the confounding effects of antibody expression and stability that arise in standard deep mutational scanning assays. The measurement of titration curves can be used for studying sequence-affinity landscapes in other protein systems. The assay has been demonstrated on a well-studied scFv antibody.
The Ccr4-Not complex is involved in the removal of mRNA poly(A) tails to regulate eukaryotic mRNA stability and translation. RNA-binding proteins contribute to specificity by interacting with both Ccr4-Not and target mRNAs. In this study, the fission yeast homologues of Tristetraprolin/TTP and Pumilio/Puf (Zfs1 and Puf3) were found to interact with Ccr4-Not and exhibit RNA-selective deadenylation. Analysis of binding kinetics revealed that this is primarily due to differences in dissociation rate constants. Shortening or removal of mRNA poly(A) tails represses gene expression in eukaryotes. The biological processes depend on deadenylation, including embryogenesis, germline maintenance, cell proliferation and attenuation of the immune response. RNA-binding proteins such as Pumilio/Puf and Tristetraprolin/TTP recognize sequence motifs in mRNAs, and also bind Ccr4-Not to target those RNAs for deadenylation. Identification of the mRNAs within these networks allows a better understanding of gene expression and the roles of RNA-binding proteins that regulate them.
A tobacco plant has been engineered to produce only the ketocarotenoid astaxanthin, allowing researchers to study photosynthesis without carotenoids. The plant was found to be able to grow photoautotrophically, with both photosystems fully functional despite the lack of carotenoids. While carotenoids are important for the absorption of sunlight and photoprotection, the study found that their absence did not affect the stability of the photosynthetic complexes. However, the absence of carotenoids did affect photostability, particularly in PSI. The mutant leaves also showed statically quenched antenna complexes due to the presence of astaxanthin, which can act as both light harvesting pigment and quencher.
Researchers conducted experiments using medaka fish to test individual recognition (IR) ability through face recognition, and found that signals near the face are important. Medaka required more time to discriminate vertically inverted faces, but not horizontally shifted faces or inverted non-face objects, suggesting the possibility that the process of face recognition may differ from that used for other objects. The mechanisms and neurological bases might differ in mammals and medaka. The ability to recognise other individuals is important for shaping animal societies. The researchers tested whether visual and odour cues are part of the identity signals, and whether the cues work collaboratively. They used both ecologically realistic settings (mating test) and a conditioned test (electric shock two-alternative forced-choice [TAFC] design) to assess strict IR in medaka.
The article discusses the role of peptide transport in cellular homeostasis and the different mechanisms that secondary active transporters use to move peptides across membranes. The stoichiometry of proton:peptide coupling in the bacterial POT family transporter, PepTSt, is investigated and the results show that at least two alternative transport mechanisms operate to move di-peptides and tri-peptides into the cell. The study highlights that the ability to couple different numbers of protons to structurally and chemically diverse ligands may explain how the POT family is able to transport a large library of di- and tri-peptides. The researchers used a sensitive and robust assay to monitor the proton movement during the transport cycle, which provided further biochemical evidence that POT family transporters do operate via multiple mechanisms for coupling peptide transport to the proton gradient.
The 96-nm axonemal repeat, which includes dynein motors and accessory structures, is essential for motility of eukaryotic flagella and cilia. The structure is particularly important for microbial pathogens which afflict nearly one billion people worldwide. However, high-resolution 3D axoneme structures have not been available for Excavates, which include pathogens of medical and economic importance. Recently, the cryo-electron tomography structures of the 96-nm repeat from Trypanosoma brucei has been reported. This protozoan parasite in the Excavate lineage causes African trypanosomiasis. The findings reveal novel inter-doublet linkages and microtubule inner proteins, and suggest that lineage-specific elaboration of axoneme structure in T. brucei reflects adaptations to support unique motility needs in diverse host environments.
Canine transmissible venereal tumour (CTVT) is a contagious cancer affecting dogs globally, which originated approximately 11,000 years ago. While the cancer’s nuclear genome is clonally transmissible, its mitochondrial genomes (mtDNAs) have been acquired by periodic capture from transient hosts. Through sequencing 449 complete mtDNAs from a global population of CTVTs, researchers identified at least five horizontal transfers of mtDNA, which delineated five tumour clades whose distributions have followed two millennia of dog global migration. Negative selection has operated to prevent accumulation of deleterious mutations in captured mtDNA and recombination has caused occasional mtDNA re-assortment. These findings provide insight into the global metastatic spread of CTVT and highlight the role of functional mtDNA in cancer evolution.
This study investigates how neurons respond to low oxygen levels (hypoxia) using the model organism C. elegans. The study shows that p38 MAP Kinase (MAPK) regulates the hypoxia response pathway through the prolyl hydroxylase egl-9, which modulates the subcellular localization of the Mint orthologue LIN-10 and internalization of glutamate receptor GLR-1, leading to depression of GLR-1-mediated behaviors. Loss of p38 MAPK impairs EGL-9 protein localization in neurons and activates the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF-1, which contributes to aging-related decreases in p38 MAPK levels and GLR-1 internalization. The study demonstrates a novel mechanism by which p38 MAPK inhibits the hypoxia response pathway, which is crucial to understanding how neurons respond to low oxygen levels and developing therapies for ischemic stroke and other neurodegenerative conditions.
Rab26, a member of the Rab family of GTPases, is associated with clusters of synaptic vesicles in neurites, and induces the formation of giant autophagosomes in the cell bodies of hippocampal neurons. The pathway triggered by Rab26 selectively channels synaptic and secretory vesicles into pre-autophagosomes, creating a new regulator of synapse turnover. Rab26 selectively localizes to presynaptic membrane vesicles and recruits autophagy-related proteins and is filled almost exclusively with synaptic vesicles and proteins typically associated with large dense-core vesicles. In the adult brain, there is persistent turnover of synapses, mostly in response to experience and learning. Synaptic membrane proteins have not yet been clearly eliminated, but the ubiquitin-proteasome system is emerging as a central player. The ESCRT pathway may be involved in the elimination of presynaptic components. Whether synaptic vesicle proteins are ubiquitinated remains unclear.
The study shows that environmental heterogeneity can reduce the efficacy of selection during range expansions, altering the neutral evolutionary dynamics and increasing the importance of chance relative to selection. The researchers tracked mutant clones in bacterial colonies grown on randomly patterned surfaces and found that local 'pinning' of the expansion front, whereby stretches of the front are slowed down on a length scale that depends on the structure of the environmental heterogeneity, focuses the range expansion into a small number of 'lucky' individuals with access to expansion paths, thus limiting the efficacy of selection. The study used plasmid loss in E. coli as a model system for spontaneous mutations with tunable growth rate effects, allowing precise control and measurement of evolutionary outcomes. The study provides insights that generalize to other spatially growing populations such as biofilms, tumors, and invasive species.
Neutrophils can regulate the molecular clock genes that control liver metabolism, potentially affecting the development of metabolic disease. These findings, based on studies in mice and human tissue samples, suggest that neutrophils may play a role in maintaining daily hepatic homeostasis through the regulation of NE/JNK/Bmal1 axis, thus enabling the liver to adapt to metabolic rhythms. Disruption of this molecular clock can result in metabolic disease, but until now, the potential regulation by immune cells remained unexplored.
A study has revealed that two nucleases, PNPase and RNase J2, are critical for ensuring cell survival when faced with phage attack using type III CRISPR-Cas systems. The genetic, molecular, and biochemical analyses revealed that PNPase promotes crRNA maturation, and both nucleases are required for efficient clearance of phage-derived nucleic acids. Furthermore, functional assays showed that RNase J2 is essential for immunity against diverse mobile genetic elements originating from plasmid and phage. This highlights the evolution of a critical collaboration between two nucleic acid degrading machines which ensures cell survival when faced with phage attack.
The Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a tick-borne viral infection that is severe and widely distributed around the world. The reported mortality rates range from 5% to 80%. Researchers obtained the complete genome sequences of CCHFV directly from the tick reservoir, one of the tick-borne diseases most maintained and transmitted by hard ticks of the Hyalomma genus. New strains, named Europe 2, were identified, which are less pathogenic than the epidemic strains from Europe 1 lineage. The difference in pathogenicity is attributed to a single tick-specific amino acid variant in the viral glycoprotein region that impairs the function of the glycoprotein precursor variant in human cells.
A new normative model has been developed to explain how decisions are made in unpredictable environments where there is an accumulation of noisy stimuli, such as identifying sudden changes in a signal. This new model, which uses a leaky accumulator with non-absorbing bounds, can account for both types of decision-making by balancing signal identification and change detection. The model’s expected rate of change of the statistics of the evidence adjusts to balance these two tasks. It is hoped that this new model will provide new insights into the expectation-driven dynamics of the underlying neural signals of the brain. The model is applied to two different tasks, each with different time scales, and human subjects were found to have learned the model and used it to make decisions in accordance with the normative model.
Researchers have discovered the fossilised heart of an extinct fish species called Rhacolepis buccalis from the Brazilian Cretaceous period. The discovery has enabled scientists to better understand the evolution of the heart in teleost fish, which includes 97% of all fish species, according to the new report in eLIFE. The fossilised heart contained at least five valve rows, representing a transitional stage between the primitive and modern outflow tract in teleosts. The research team analysed the heart using a synchrotron microtomography technique, and suggest that cardiac preservation in fossils is possible.
Researchers have tested whether oxygen deprivation followed by re-oxygenation can lead to loss of neurons and an injury response, leading to the increased growth of new neurons in the salamander brain. The study confirms that reactive oxygen species (ROS), which may cause tissue damage or act as a signalling molecule, are produced during oxygen deprivation and that inhibition of ROS biosynthesis inhibits growth of new neurons. However, the study also demonstrates that increased ROS production is essential to cell cycle reentry by ependymoglia cells and neuronal regeneration in the midbrain, leading the researchers to propose that ROS may have been recruited during evolution to provide the capacity to regenerate neuronal subpopulations.
The method of measuring chromatin organization in single cells, scNOMe-seq, was adapted to measure chromatin accessibility and endogenous DNA methylation in individual cells. Advantages of scNOMe-seq include its ability to measure transcription-factor binding events, and to estimate the average nucleosome phasing distances in single cells. Extensive transcriptional variation between individual cells has been observed using single cell RNA-seq, thus it is important to measure chromatin organization in individual cells. NOMe-seq data includes several unique features that are advantageous considering the challenges associated with single cell measurements, and it can be performed on single cells. In addition to endogenous methylation at CpG dinucleotides, single cell NOMe-seq (scNOMe-seq) measured chromatin accessibility at DNase hypersensitive sites (DHSs) and TF binding sites in individual cells, and detected footprints of CTCF binding at individual loci.
The traditional understanding is that shape perception is processed solely by the ventral visual pathway, but recent evidence suggests that the dorsal pathway also contributes to shape-based representations. Two experiments were conducted using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and psychophysical measures to better understand the response properties, topographical organization, and perceptual relevance of shape processing in both pathways. The results challenge the strict functional dichotomy between the pathways and suggest a more distributed model of shape processing. The study finds that shape sensitivity increases from early visual cortex to extrastriate cortex but then decreases in anterior regions in both pathways. Additionally, the lateral aspect of the ventral pathway and posterior regions of the dorsal pathway were sensitive to fundamental shape properties, even for unrecognizable images. The results also suggest that the posterior regions of dorsal cortex are responsive to the shape of the visual input just like the ventral pathway. Further, the representational structure of regions in the posterior dorsal pathway was highly correlated with the representational structure of lateral-ventral regions of interest, suggesting similar topographical organization constrained by cortical distance from the visual cortex and connectivity to other cortical systems.
Exposure to particulate matter (PM) air pollution is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. In this study, the authors investigated the role of Acod1, a gene induced by PM in macrophages, and its product itaconate in regulating inflammation and mitochondrial respiration. The authors found that PM induces Acod1 expression and production of itaconate, which inhibits mitochondrial respiration via complex II inhibition. The authors also found that exogenous itaconate attenuated PM-induced inflammation in macrophages, and was sufficient to activate NRF2, a transcription factor that has anti-inflammatory effects. However, the authors found that endogenous itaconate production was not required for NRF2 activation or the anti-inflammatory effects of exogenous itaconate, and that there are important differences between endogenous and exogenously applied itaconate. The authors conclude that the effects of itaconate production on inflammation are stimulus-dependent, and that stimulus and location of itaconate production play major roles in governing the effect of itaconate on inflammation in macrophages.
Researchers have developed a novel set of synthetic hormone-activated Cas9-based repressors (HACRs) that can be used to manipulate plant development. Hormones control the programmes that shape a plant's morphology and response to environmental challenges, and HACRs are designed to reprogramme plant development in an agriculturally relevant manner by changing how hormonal circuitry regulates target genes. They can therefore be used to optimise plant forms for specific natural or artificial environments. The HACRs can respond to both exogenous hormone treatments and local differences in endogenous hormone levels associated with development by altering how specific hormones regulate genes of interest. This technological advance enables researchers to more precisely alter plant development and signal pathways without introducing unintended off-target effects.
Motile cilia generate fluid flow over epithelia in various organs. Patch clamping single motile cilia in mammalian ependymal cells showed that ciliary calcium concentration is slightly elevated over cytoplasmic calcium concentration at steady state, but changes in cytoplasmic calcium rapidly equilibrate in motile cilia. Calcium signaling that regulates flagellar or ciliary beating has been studied in spermatozoa and protists, but it is not clear whether ciliary calcium influx changes beat frequency in mammalian cells. The beating of ependymal motile cilia is not regulated by voltage-gated calcium channels, unlike that of protists. Motile cilia are found in specialized sensory cells and in epithelial cells in the airways, fallopian tubes, and brain ventricles. This study sought to determine whether calcium-permeant ion channels are present in motile cilia and whether they change cilia behavior. Capacitive current relaxation measurements showed that motile cilia are electrically coupled to the cellular compartment. Bath substitution with TEA-Cl/BaCl2 blocked the remaining K+ conductances. Resting motile cilia calcium concentration is only slightly elevated over cytoplasmic calcium concentration at steady state. Access to a motile cilium was typically achieved by applying a series of brief voltage pulses. Upon successful “break-in,” we were able to monitor dye diffusion from the electrode into the cilium. Recording via the whole-motile-cilium yielded a linear current that reversed at hyperpolarized potentials and was primarily carried by K+, reminiscent of the ohmic currents reported for ependymal cell bodies.
A new study has revealed the development of the mammalian heart and why it is unable to regenerate. The study found that cardiomyocytes lose their ability to proliferate shortly after birth due to the loss of centrosome integrity, a cell organelle responsible for organizing microtubules in the cell. Consequently, postnatal cardiomyocytes are unable to undergo ciliogenesis, and the nuclear envelope adopts the job of a microtubule-organizing center. Researchers discovered that centrosome integrity is lost in mammals shortly after birth, while adult zebrafish and newt cardiomyocytes are still able to proliferate and maintain centrosome integrity. The study provides a novel mechanism for the post-mitotic state of mammalian cardiomyocytes and a potential explanation of why mammals can’t regenerate their hearts.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are natural amino-acid-based antibiotics that selectively target bacteria. Human AMP LL37 was investigated against Escherichia coli, and unexpected observations were made. A large number of LL37 peptides were absorbed and retained by E. coli cells upon inhibition of growth, which increased population survivability. The increase of the minimum inhibitory concentration with cell density was observed, along with extensive lag in growth introduced by sub-lethal dosages of LL37 peptides. The MIC for LL37 peptide was dependent on E. coli density, even in dilute cultures. The inoculum effect was due to the absorption of peptides into the cells. These observations provide a detailed mechanism for AMPs action, which can lead to the rational design of novel antibiotic agents.
Truncating mutations in the giant sarcomeric protein Titin can cause dilated cardiomyopathy and skeletal myopathy. These mutations are typically found in the C-terminal two-thirds of the protein in severely affected dilated cardiomyopathy patients, but it is unclear how mutation position influences disease mechanism. Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, zebrafish lines with Titin truncations in the N-terminal and C-terminal regions were generated. C-terminal mutations caused severe myopathy whereas N-terminal mutations demonstrated mild phenotypes, despite neither mutation acting as a dominant negative. This variation of severity with mutation position may be explained by a conserved internal promoter at the precise position where divergence in disease severity occurs. The study used zebrafish models to explore the basis of variation.
The role of the cerebral cortex in voluntary motor control is unclear. Researchers used optogenetic inhibition to study the role of the cortex in a head-fixed task where mice reached, grabbed, and ate a food pellet. The inhibition of the cortex blocked initiation and froze execution of the prehension behavior, but left untrained movements unaffected. However, unexpected prehension occurred immediately after cortical inhibition during rest periods lacking a cue and pellet, especially in trained and food-deprived animals. The results demonstrate the necessity and sufficiency of cortical activity for enacting a learned skill. The study provides insights into the role of the cortex in skilled movement.
Exophilin-8 is a protein that helps anchor secretory granules within the actin cortex, a network of microfilaments beneath the plasma membrane of cells. This is important for the release of granules, which contain hormones and neurotransmitters, from professional secretory cells. Exophilin-8 interacts with specific motor proteins, myosin-Va and myosin-VIIa, to transport granules to the plasma membrane. However, it was previously unclear how exophilin-8 directly links to the actin cortex. A recent study has now identified RIM-BP2, a protein that helps anchor granules to the actin cortex indirectly via its interaction with myosin-VIIa. The newly discovered exophilin-8-RIM-BP2-myosin-VIIa complex acts as a scaffold that supports the release of granules beneath the plasma membrane. This mechanism was investigated using exophilin-8 knockout mice, which exhibited decreased insulin secretion due to impaired granule localization.
The subthalamic nucleus (STN) is a subcortical structure in the basal ganglia that is known for its role in motor inhibition, but little is known about its role in mediating cognitive functions in humans. This study explores the STN's role in decision making under conditions of uncertainty using single-neuron recordings and intermittent deep brain stimulation (DBS) during a financial decision-making task. The study finds that on high-uncertainty trials, STN activity encodes the upcoming decision within a brief (500ms) temporal window during the choice period, prior to the manifestation of the choice. The application of intermittent DBS selectively prior to the choice period alters decisions and biases subject behavior towards conservative wagers. This is the first study to apply intermittent DBS in humans actively engaged in a cognitive task and the first to demonstrate a reduction in risk-seeking behavior following STN DBS.
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles with a range of functions, including intercellular communication and tumour cell metastasis. A study showed that inactivating the vacuolar ATPase in HeLa cells results in an increase in the production of exosomes. The exosomes remained clustered on the cell surface, similar to retroviruses, which are attached to the plasma membrane by tetherin. It was found that tetherin plays a key role in exosome fate, determining whether they participate in long-range or short-range interactions. The study also found that the extracellular vesicles that accumulate in BafA1-treated cells are exosomes.
Researchers have identified the enzyme responsible for the cleavage of uromodulin, the most abundant protein found in urine, according to a study published in eLife. Uromodulin is a key component in kidney function and disease. The enzyme, hepsin, releases an inhibitory EHP motif, making it possible for the protein to form polymers essential to its biological function. The researchers say their discovery could prove relevant to understand other ZP domain proteins, such as those involved in inner ear tectorial membrane and egg coat proteins.
Tarantula toxins that interact with ion channel proteins play a crucial role in understanding the physiological and molecular mechanisms of these signaling proteins. Two types of tarantula toxins were compared in this study: voltage-sensing toxins that bind to voltage-activated ion channels and acid sensing toxins that activate acid-sensing ion channels. The study found that both types of toxins interact with the membrane, but voltage-sensing toxins partition deeper into the bilayer. The study also revealed that the two classes of structurally related toxins use related surfaces for binding to helices within their target channels. The findings improve the understanding of the mechanism of action of tarantula toxins on ion channels.
The rate of divergence of transcriptional networks is decoupled from the global rate of genome sequence evolution, suggesting a small fraction of the genome regulates transcription. Genome sequences diverge more rapidly in mammals than in other animal lineages, but the effect of this rapid divergence on transcriptional evolution remains unclear. Recent reports have indicated a faster divergence of transcription factor binding in mammals than in insects, but others found the reverse for mRNA expression. Here, the authors show that transcriptional networks evolve at a common rate across mammal, bird and insect lineages. Differences in rates of genome divergence were greatly reduced when comparing only chromatin-accessible sequences. Gene expression levels were found to diverge at similar rates in all three lineages. Finally, the evolution of GSTF binding patterns was examined and cross-species similarity in GSTF occupancy was found using a unified analytical method across various datasets.
A new study has found that using epigenomic maps alongside genetic data can help identify new genes and biological pathways linked to complex human traits. Researchers integrated information from association studies with epigenomic maps to demonstrate that enhancers significantly overlap known loci associated with cardiac QT interval and QRS duration. They applied functional criteria to identify loci associated with QT interval that do not meet genome-wide significance and are missed by existing studies to identify novel loci. The research demonstrates that these 'sub-threshold' signals represent novel loci, and that epigenomic maps are effective at discriminating true biological signals from noise .
Resistance to targeted cancer therapies is a major problem in the clinical setting. To address this challenge, researchers have improved and applied the experimental-computational perturbation biology method to construct network models from high-throughput measurements of molecular and phenotypic responses to combinatorial targeted perturbations. In RAF-inhibitor resistant melanoma cells, they measured 143 proteomic/phenotypic entities under 89 perturbation conditions and predicted c-Myc as an effective therapeutic co-target with BRAF or MEK. Using the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and protein kinase inhibitors, they confirmed the prediction that co-targeting a specific upstream alteration and a general downstream point of vulnerability is a good strategy to prevent or overcome resistance to targeted drugs. The researchers propose a potentially generalizable strategy for overcoming resistance to targeted cancer therapies.
The loss of Atoh1 from various components of the respiratory circuitry has so far produced at most 50% neonatal lethality. Researchers examined parabrachial complex neurons derived from the rostral rhombic lip and found that they are activated during respiratory chemochallenges. Atoh1-deletion from the rRL causes apneas and respiratory depression during hypoxia, likely due to loss of projections to the preBötzinger Complex and RTN. Atoh1 thus promotes the development of the neural circuits governing hypoxic and hypercapnic chemoresponses, and combined loss of Atoh1 from these regions causes fully penetrant neonatal lethality. Atoh1 is expressed in the developing hindbrain and promotes the development of several nuclei involved in respiratory control. Atoh1 is also expressed in postmitotic neurons of two paramotor nuclei: the intertrigeminal region and the retrotrapezoid nucleus. These results suggest that Atoh1-lineage neurons might be important for respiratory responses through signaling with one or both of these neuropeptides.
A new study has shown that a father's exposure to nicotine before reproduction can programme his offspring to resist addictive drugs such as cocaine. The research was conducted on mice and is published in the journal eLife. Males brought up on nicotine showed "enhanced drug clearance", making them more tolerant to hard drugs. The effect is due to metabolic tolerance to xenobiotics, or synthetic chemicals. The phenotypes of future generations can be influenced by paternal environmental conditions, however it is unclear whether offspring represent specific responses to a father’s exposure history or a “quality of life” response. This study suggests the former.
Transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) are bacterial proteins that bind to DNA using an array of tandem 34-residue repeats. How TALE repeat domains wrap around DNA without using external energy is not well understood. However, a new study has examined the kinetics of DNA binding of TALE arrays with varying numbers of identical repeats. The study reveals conformational heterogeneity in both the free- and DNA-bound TALE arrays, indicating a TALE instability that is functionally important for DNA binding. For TALEs forming less than one superhelical turn around DNA, partly folded states inhibit DNA binding. In contrast, for TALEs forming more than one turn, partly folded states facilitate DNA binding, demonstrating a mode of 'functional instability' that facilitates macromolecular assembly.
The brain uses distributed neural activity patterns to identify and categorize objects, including odor objects in the piriform cortex. While the contributions of afferent and associative inputs to odor perception are poorly understood, a study administered baclofen, a GABA (B) agonist, to examine the role of associative connections in sustaining olfactory categorical representations. Baclofen disrupted associative connections in the piriform cortex, reducing within-category pattern separation, but also reduced pattern separation between odor categories in orbitofrontal cortex and impeded within-category generalization in hippocampus. The results suggest that odor categorization engages stimulus discrimination and generalization at different stages of olfactory information processing, highlighting the importance of associative networks in maintaining categorical boundaries.
The document discusses a study on how well mice can discriminate color and wavelength-specific luminance changes across visuotopic space. The non-uniform distribution of cone opsins in the mouse retina potentially complicates both luminance and color sensitivity. The study found that mice were able to discriminate color and were able to do so more broadly across visuotopic space than expected from the cone-opsin distribution. Wavelength-band-specific differences in luminance sensitivity were also found. The study highlights the importance of understanding the extent of luminance and color information that is behaviorally accessible to the mouse, especially given that the mouse visual system is increasingly being used as a model system for studying both cortical sensory processing and behavior.
The article discusses the process of HIV RNA replication and how it requires the nuclear export of unspliced and singly spliced viral transcripts, which is achieved through the formation of ribonucleoprotein particles that require the viral Rev protein to bind to the Rev-response element (RRE) located within a viral RNA intron. The article presents findings that show sequential structural changes within the RRE during the assembly of the Rev-RRE complex, with the initial binding of Rev to the RRE triggering RNA tertiary structural changes that enable further Rev binding and the rapid formation of the export complex. The article also discusses how the formation of the export complex promotes a switch to late HIV protein expression and packaging. Finally, the article provides evidence suggesting that tertiary interactions between the 100-113 region and Stem I help maintain the compact fold of the RRE.
Researchers developed a high-throughput small-molecule screen to identify insulinotropic compounds that act downstream of the circadian clock in order to identify new targets for diabetes treatment. They generated β-cells with a luminescent insulin reporter and screened 2640 drugs and drug-like molecules, identifying 19 hit compounds that enhance insulin secretion. Ivermectin was found to be the most promising compound, activating the P2Y1 purinergic receptor and enhancing glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The researchers also found that the P2Y1 receptor is a direct transcriptional target of the molecular clock factor BMAL1 and a potent regulator of glucose-dependent calcium signaling. Ivermectin was found to ameliorate secretory defects caused by disruption of the circadian clock network and improve glucose tolerance and insulin release in animal models. These findings suggest that the P2Y1 purinergic receptor could be a new therapeutic target for diabetes.
A new study challenges the long-held view of anatomical models of memory that the hippocampal inputs to the mammillary bodies via the postcommissural fornix are the principal contribution to memory. The study removed, in rats, the two main inputs reaching the mammillary bodies: the postcommissural fornix from the hippocampal formation and Gudden's ventral tegmental nucleus, and found that only mammillothalamic tract and Gudden's ventral tegmental nucleus lesions impaired behavioral tests of spatial working memory and disrupted the use of spatial landmarks. The findings suggest a new understanding of why specific diencephalic structures are vital for memory.
The circadian system in eukaryotes is based on cell-autonomous molecular oscillators that rely on transcriptional feedback loops. Most organisms possess circadian rhythms that generate oscillations in biochemistry, physiology, and behavior. However, the regulatory mechanisms behind rhythmic gene expression remain elusive. To address the issue, researchers used Nascent-Seq to measure the circadian dynamics of mouse liver transcription. Although many genes are rhythmically transcribed, many rhythmic mRNAs manifest poor transcriptional rhythms, indicating post-transcriptional regulation plays a significant role in circadian mRNA expression. The data also reveal a disconnect between DNA binding and transcriptional output of CLK:BMAL1 genes. Overall, the study highlights new regulatory features of rhythmic gene expression and demonstrates Nascent-Seq's potential as a genome-wide assay for the study of gene expression.
The article discusses the regulation of surface ion channels, which are important for cellular function and survival. Dysregulation of these ion channels can lead to various diseases such as cardiac arrhythmias and cystic fibrosis. The article focuses specifically on how ubiquitination, a process that covalently attaches ubiquitin molecules to a protein, affects the fate of the voltage-gated K+ channel pore-forming subunit, Q1. The authors engineered E3 ligases to selectively target Q1 and catalyze its ubiquitination, which led to a decrease in surface expression without affecting total expression. The authors also performed biochemical assays to confirm the targeted ubiquitination and showed that the engineered E3 ligase nanoCHIP enhanced Q1 ubiquitination. The article provides a potent tool to post-translationally manipulate surface expression of ion channel macromolecular complexes, which may lead to new therapeutic interventions for ion channelopathies.
A study analyzing data from intracranial electrodes placed in the brains of humans during REM sleep has found that there are prominent beta (15-35Hz) and theta (4-8Hz) oscillations in both the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) during REM sleep. The two regions are known to be implicated in memory and emotional regulation, as well as motor functions, and the coherence of these oscillations suggests interaction between the areas during REM sleep. The study supports the hypothesis that REM sleep plays a role in the consolidation of emotional and procedural motor memories, and the regulation of emotions.
Sleep deprivation causes people to choose more energy-dense foods, which can lead to weight gain. This study examined the role of the endocannabinoid system and olfactory processing in this relationship. Participants were put through a partial sleep-deprivation protocol, and their brain activity in response to food and non-food odors was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging. The researchers found that sleep deprivation increased levels of the endocannabinoid compound 2-oleoylglycerol, enhanced encoding of food odors in the piriform cortex (an olfactory brain area), and shifted food choices toward energy-dense options. This relationship was mediated by odor-evoked connectivity between the piriform cortex and insula, a brain region involved in integrating feeding-related signals. These findings suggest that sleep deprivation alters the ECS and olfactory processing to modulate food choices.
This document discusses the role of light and metabolic signals in activating stem cell systems in plants. Plant stem cells remain dormant until the postembryonic phase of development, and the study investigates how light and metabolic signals overcome stem cell dormancy at the shoot apical meristem. The TOR kinase acts as a central integrator of light and metabolic signals, and a key regulator of stem cell activation. Light is the sole energy source of plants and influences their development and physiology. Photomorphogenesis is the default pathway in plants, and light perception triggers photomorphogenesis. Plants have evolved complex mechanisms to perceive light quality and quantity through a range of photoreceptors that are mainly absorbing in the blue, red, and far-red range of the spectrum. The document also shows that stem cell control in the SAM of Arabidopsis thaliana is based on the activity of the homeodomain transcription factor WUSCHEL (WUS), which is expressed in the organizing centre and necessary and sufficient to non-cell-autonomously induce stem cell fate by protein movement.
A new "molecular tracking device" has been developed to follow the distribution, acquisition, and retention of antigen (foreign substances that trigger an immune response) in the lymph node. Using an antigen conjugated to a nuclease-resistant DNA tag, along with single-cell mRNA sequencing, researchers were able to quantify antigen abundance in the lymph node and identify new mechanisms of antigen acquisition and retention at cellular resolution in vivo. The study also found that lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) can store antigens from viral infection and vaccination, a process known as "antigen archiving," which is important for poising memory T cells for future antigenic encounters. The new approach could provide better understanding of antigen acquisition, processing, and retention in the lymph node, and enable new approaches to study dynamic tissue dissemination of antigen-adjuvant conjugates.
The study looks at the need to interpret the function of regulatory DNA, especially as exome sequencing gives way to genome sequencing. The study focused on determining the binding locations of four liver-essential transcription factors (TFs) in five different species. It was found that less than half of the human CRMs were found as a CRM in the orthologous region of a second species. However, shared CRMs were associated with liver pathways and disease loci identified by genome-wide association studies. The study suggests that multi-species analyses of experimentally determined combinatorial TF binding will help identify critical genomic regions for tissue-specific gene control.
Scientists have developed a new screening system that uses flies to test and validate candidate genes for heart disease. After performing genetic sequencing on patients with congenital heart disease (CHD), the team used Drosophila to test 134 genes they had identified from the patients’ genomics data. Over 70 candidate genes were validated with the help of the model, including some coding for histone H3K4 modifying proteins. The research allowed for the potent testing, ranking, and targeting of genes that may lead to diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of CHD. The scientists noted that genomic sequencing can identify numerous genes but a high-throughput model system is necessary to validate gene associations with pathology. Functional gene validation systems in model organisms are essential to identify genetic variants for certain diseases. 

The study used high-speed atomic force microscopy to observe structural changes in actin filaments induced by cofilin binding, and found that cofilin forms clusters along actin filaments where the filaments were thicker and the helical pitch was shorter. These changes were asymmetrically propagated to the neighboring bare zone on the pointed-end side of the cluster while the pitch on the barbed-end side remained similar to the control group. The research suggests that active cofilin is required, but biochemical signaling is not sufficient to explain how cofilin activities are properly regulated spatially and temporally in cells. The study also revealed that cofilin binding shortens the helical pitch of actin filaments and that this cooperative conformational change in filaments is propagated to neighboring actin subunits increasing their affinity for that, or another, actin binding protein.
Social insects can recognize group members through colony-specific cuticular pheromonal signatures, but it is unclear how these profiles are generated in different species. In honey bees, the colony-specific cuticular hydrocarbon (CHC) profile matures in foragers through age-dependent quantitative and qualitative chemical transitions, which are driven by environmentally-sensitive intrinsic biosynthetic pathways. Non-nestmate rejection behaviors are contextually restricted to behavioral interactions between entering foragers and guards at the hive entrance. The CHC profiles, and likely nestmate recognition cues, in honey bees are more likely a product of a genetically-determined developmental program that is modulated by colony-specific factors, compared to a homogenization and transfer mechanism commonly seen in ant species. CHC profiles of individual honey bee workers exhibit stereotypic quantitative and qualitative changes as they transition from in-hive tasks to foraging outside, and mature colony-specific recognition cues are primarily associated with the foraging task.
The study investigates the survival of cells following activation of caspase-3, which is responsible for cell death. Researchers developed a system called CasExpress, which marked and manipulated cells that survived caspase activation in the fruit fly Drosophila. They found widespread survival of caspase-3 activity in different tissues, with some cells activating caspase-3 during their normal development without evidence of apoptosis. The activation of caspase-3 was also observed in the adult tissues of every animal, although the precise patterns varied. Inhibition of caspase activity in wing discs reduced wing size, demonstrating functional significance. The study proposes that the different patterns of caspase activation represent distinct functions of executioner caspases during normal development.
The development of TP53-MDM2 inhibitors has been an area of focus in cancer treatment, but not all TP53 wild type tumors are sensitive to these inhibitors. To improve selection of appropriate patients, an mRNA expression signature based on 13 TP53 transcriptional target genes was developed. However, reanalysis of TP53 status in the validation data set of cancer cell lines considered TP53 wild type revealed TP53 inactivating alterations in 23% of cell lines, indicating that the 13-gene signature cannot predict response to TP53-MDM2 inhibitors in TP53 wild type tumors. Despite attempts to predict sensitivity, there is currently no clinically validated and FDA-approved assay to identify WT TP53 tumors most likely to respond to TP53-MDM2 inhibitors. The 13-gene signature is a proxy for TP53 status and has a good ability to detect cell lines with inactivated TP53. However, it is not a perfect predictor of sensitivity to TP53-MDM2 inhibitors in TP53 WT tumors.
A new study investigated the spread of Tau protein in the brain by contrasting functional connectivity of the transentorhinal and anterolateral entorhinal cortex (alEC) and posteromedial EC (pmEC). Using resting state fMRI and PET scans of cognitively normal older adults, the results revealed that Tau preferentially deposited in alEC-connected cortex compared to pmEC-connected or non-connected cortex, and stronger connectivity was associated with increased Tau deposition. The study suggests that functional connectivity patterns of alEC may be a better predictor of subsequent cortical Tau deposition than pmEC, and that relationships between functional connectivity and Tau deposition are strengthened in the presence of amyloid-beta (Aβ).
The organization of different types of neurons in the retina is important for proper neural network formation and information processing. DSCAM and DSCAML1 are cell adhesion molecules that help this development by promoting self-avoidance, normal developmental cell death, and directing vertical neurite stratification. The C-terminus of DSCAM may be responsible for a subset of DSCAM's functions, but research found that different cell types have different dependencies on this domain for function. The DSCAM mutation (DscamΔC) does not lead to severe histological defects and its role in the RGC is still unclear.
L1 retrotransposons are a type of mobile genetic element that make up approximately one sixth of the human genome. The L1HS-Ta subfamily is an endogenous mutagen that contributes to genetic diversity by retrotransposing and accumulating in modern human genomes. The transcriptional activation of individual L1HS-Ta copies remains poorly understood due to their high levels of sequence identity and polymorphic insertions absent from the reference genome. A recent study mapped fixed and polymorphic L1HS-Ta copies in 12 commonly-used somatic cell lines and identified transcriptional and epigenetic signatures allowing the unambiguous identification of active L1HS-Ta copies in their genomic context. It was found that only a very restricted subset of L1HS-Ta loci significantly contributes to the bulk of L1 expression, and these loci are differentially regulated among distinct cell lines, supporting a local model of L1 transcriptional activation in somatic cells, governed by individual-, locus-, and cell-type-specific determinants.
A study performed a combinatorial screen with 13 transgenic Arabidopsis lines with an increased leaf size to gain a better understanding of the links between genes controlling growth and the mechanisms driving leaf development and to identify positive epistatic effects on leaf growth. Pairwise perturbations of 13 genes positively affecting leaf size in a gain or loss-of-function situation were analyzed by measuring the individual and total leaf area. The study found that positive epistatic effects on growth were observed with combinations of genes with a similar mode of action, but also with genes which affect distinct processes, such as cell proliferation and cell expansion. The study highlights the importance of epistasis, or interaction between genes, in the regulation of complex traits and the need to identify and understand the nature of underlying gene interactions to gain better insights into the regulation of complex traits and dissect the architecture of biological networks.
The delta-protocadherins (δ-Pcdhs) play important roles in neural development and are expressed in combination within neurons, but the combinatorial diversity and how these combinations influence cell adhesion are poorly understood. This study shows that olfactory sensory neurons can express between zero and seven δ-Pcdhs, and that different δ-Pcdhs possess distinct adhesive affinities. These results provide a framework for determining how combinations of δ-Pcdhs mediate adhesion and how different cadherin subfamilies integrate to regulate cell-cell adhesion. The study also uncovers principles used by δ-Pcdhs to regulate combinatorial adhesion, demonstrating how intra and interfamily interactions can amplify the impact of this small subfamily on neuronal function.
The document describes the structure of the open promoter complex (RPo) in bacterial RNA polymerase, which is important for gene expression control. Through crystal structures and biochemical analyses, the document reveals key features that stabilize the double-strand/single-strand DNA junction at the upstream edge of the -10 element where the transcription bubble forms. Additionally, it provides insights on RNAP interactions with duplex DNA just upstream of the -10 element and protein/DNA interactions that direct the DNA template strand into the RNAP active site. Finally, it describes the transition from initial transcription complex to a stable elongation complex through abortive initiation, where steric clash occurs between the elongating RNA transcript and elements of sigma.
Flowering plants have evolved a novel mechanism for fertilization that involves F-actin dynamics in the female gametes, without the involvement of microtubules or centrosomes. The authors used Arabidopsis thaliana to study this mechanism and found that F-actin structures assist the male nucleus during its migration towards the female nucleus. They identified a female gamete-specific Rho-GTPase that regulates F-actin dynamics and actin-myosin interactions, which are also involved in male gamete nucleus migration. The study suggests that flowering plants have developed a separate actin-based mechanism for gamete nucleus migration and fusion, which accounts for the complete loss of the centrosome in these plants.
The Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock is shaped by natural selection of genetic variants for adaptation to varying environments. In order to investigate the basis for variation, a modified Bay-0 x Shakdara recombinant inbred line was examined to identify heritable variation in clock speed. This led to the identification of the early flowering 3 (ELF3) gene as a major quantitative trait locus (QTL). The ELF3-Sha allele was found to cause a short-period phenotype under light and severely dampened rhythm generation in darkness. Evidence suggests that the ELF3-Sha allele originated in Central Asia. The role of ELF3 in the circadian clock is to act as a light repressor and its functional abilities are largely dependent on its cellular localization. The internal timing mechanism known as the circadian clock synchronizes major developmental and physiological processes and provides an adaptive advantage under diverse climatic conditions. During diurnal cycles, light is correlated with warmth and darkness is correlated with coolness. Thus, many organisms including plants have evolved internal timing mechanisms to predict cyclic environmental cues.
Researchers have developed a new method of introducing light sensitivity into N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, which are involved in neuronal signalling, using azobenzene-based photoswitchable unnatural amino acids. The new method avoids the need for commonly used tethered photoswitchable ligands, which require solvent-accessible protein labelling and are bulky. The genetically-encodable PSAAs developed by the researchers provide reversibility and site tolerance, and were used to create a set of “optocontrollable NMDA receptors”. The new technique should be useful for probing neuronal protein structure and function and will be of potential use in optopharmacology.
A study was conducted using rats as an animal model to investigate the neural circuitry underlying decisions guided by the accumulation of auditory evidence. In the study, the researchers inactivated two rat cortical regions, the frontal orienting fields (FOF) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC), to determine their causal roles in accumulation-based decision-making. Results showed that inactivation of the FOF induced performance impairments, which were described as an impairment in the premotor output pathway of an evidence accumulator with a long integration time constant of over 240 ms. The PPC played a minor causal role in decisions guided by auditory evidence compared to internally-guided decisions. The study sheds light on the specific roles of these two brain regions in accumulation-based decision-making in rodents.
Mechanical forces between cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) impact cell shape and function. Tendons, which connect muscles with bones, bear extreme tensional force due to their ECM-rich tissues. In a new study, scientists used transgenic zebrafish expressing mCherry driven by the tendon determinant scleraxis and found that tendon fibroblasts extend arrays of microtubule-rich projections at the onset of muscle contraction, forming a dense curtain along the myotendinous junctions at somite boundaries. Paralysis or destabilization of microtubules reduces projection length and surrounding ECM, which are rescued by muscle stimulation. Paralysis also reduces SMAD3 phosphorylation in tenocytes, and chemical inhibition of TGFβ signaling shortens tenocyte projections. These findings suggest that TGFβ, released in response to force, acts on tenocytes to alter their morphology and ECM production, revealing a feedback mechanism by which tendons adapt to tension.

The molecular mechanisms underlying substrate recognition and cleavage by Escherichia coli RseP, a member of the S2P family of intramembrane-cleaving proteases, remain unclear. However, a looped region of RseP has been found to play a part in helping to recognize transmembrane segments of substrates in extended conformation, and by presenting them to the proteolytic active site, contributing to substrate discrimination. RseP plays a key role in regulating the σE extracytoplasmic stress response and is involved in the proteolytic removal of remnant signal peptides from the membrane. RseP proteolytic activity was disturbed by potential β-strand conformation loop mutations, which implicated the β-hairpin-like structure near its active site in substrate recognition and cleavage. This is an important discovery as the detailed knowledge of mechanisms underlying substrate discrimination and cleavage would help control the cleavage of membrane proteins by intramembrane-cleaving proteases including S2P proteases.
Researchers recorded the vocalisations of individual zebra finches in social groups using on-bird microphone transmitters, while females and males went through different stages of the breeding cycle. The researchers found that calls occurred non-randomly in fine-tuned vocal interactions and decreased within groups while pair-specific patterns emerged. Call-type combinations of vocal interactions changed within pairs and were associated with successful egg-laying, highlighting the potential fitness relevance of calling dynamics in communication systems. The research aimed to investigate with individual-level resolution the calling behaviour of zebra finches that were behaving freely in social groups, in a changing environment.
Researchers have developed a peptidomics method for the analysis of peptides derived from wound fluids, which could serve as a promising tool for diagnosis and/or prognosis of wound healing. They found that wound fluids contained a high degree of peptides, and using their method, they were able to identify unique peptide patterns of various proteins in uninfected and Staphylococcus aureus-infected wounds. This has potential for providing biomarkers for wound healing and infection, which is a significant medical problem. The researchers also showed that their sample preparation method is robust and can be used for peptidome comparison of various donor fluids. Wound fluids were found to contain more peptides than plasma, and there was a clear difference in the types of peptides present in each fluid. In sterile acute wound fluids, 74 proteins were detected in all five samples.
Researchers have created a genomics resource to explore the molecular properties of neural circuits in the Drosophila visual system. The study used the TAPIN-seq method to measure transcriptomes of distinct neural cell types and developed a resource of high-resolution transcriptomes for 100 driver lines covering 67 cell types, available at http://www.opticlobe.com. By combining these transcriptomes with recently reported connectomes, the researchers were able to characterise how information is transmitted and processed across a range of scales, from individual synapses to circuit pathways, and generate functional hypotheses based on receptor expression. The study provides a better understanding of the molecular properties of neural circuits and could inform future research on circuit function.
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) mediates nucleocytoplasmic transport across the nuclear envelope through the use of nucleoporins (nups) arranged around a central axis. The Y-, Ndc1, Nsp1, and Nic96 nup complexes make up the scaffold of the NPC, with the Nic96 complex consisting of proteins Nic96, Nup157/170, Nup188, and Nup192. The structure of Nup188 has been determined and found to be a stacked helical protein with similarities to nuclear transport receptors (NTRs). Both Nup188 and Nup192 bind to FG-repeats and are able to translocate through NPCs by facilitated diffusion, suggesting that the NPC and soluble nuclear transport machinery are evolutionarily related. The structure was obtained through truncation constructs and crystallizing two major parts of the full-length protein from the fungi Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Myceliophthora thermophila.
This study investigates the thermotactic response of Escherichia coli and its interplay with chemotactic stimuli. The research combines an in-vivo analysis of the pathway activity, a microfluidic taxis assay, and mathematical modeling. The results show that in the absence of chemical attractants E. coli exhibits a steady thermophilic response, the magnitude of which decreases at higher temperatures. Adaptation to high levels of chemoattractants leads to inversion of the thermotactic response at intermediate temperatures and bidirectional cell accumulation in a thermal gradient. Lastly, the preferred accumulation temperature corresponds to optimal growth in the presence of the chemoattractant serine, suggesting that the thermotactic behavior of E. coli could be explained by the optimization of growth rate.
CtpS Synthetase is a metabolic enzyme that forms large-scale filamentous structures in bacteria and eukaryotes, and its activity is essential for cell growth and metabolic regulation. The researchers found that CtpS polymerization inhibits its activity, and CtpS's product, CTP, induces assembly. They used electron microscopy to define the structure of CtpS polymers and found that polymerization sterically hinders a conformational change necessary for CtpS activity. Structure-guided mutagenesis and mathematical modeling indicate that coupling activity to polymerization promotes cooperative catalytic regulation. This regulatory mechanism is important for cellular function since a mutant that disrupts CtpS polymerization disrupts E. coli growth and metabolic regulation without reducing CTP levels. CtpS polymerization-based regulation is essential for ultrasensitive metabolic control and cytoskeletal evolution.
The western corn rootworm Diabrotica virgifera virgifera, the most damaging maize pest on the planet, accumulates the root-derived benzoxazinoid glucosides HDMBOA-Glc and MBOA-Glc, rendering it highly resistant to nematodes. The larvae can hydrolyze HDMBOA-Glc, but not MBOA-Glc, to produce toxic MBOA upon predator attack. This work shows that herbivores combine stabilized and reactivated plant toxins to defend themselves against a symbiosis between the third and the fourth trophic level enemies.
Recent studies have challenged the idea that Wnts, a type of signaling protein with critical roles in development and disease, spread between cells and signal at a distance. Whether long-distance extracellular Wnt dispersal occurs and is biologically relevant is debated. However, using fluorescently tagged alleles for a C. elegans Wnt homolog, scientists have visualized a native, long-range Wnt gradient in a living animal and provided evidence that free, extracellular Wnt dispersal is critical for neuroblast migration. These findings provide direct evidence that Wnts spread extracellularly to regulate aspects of long-range signaling.
The Hippo-YAP pathway regulates cell contact inhibition, proliferation, and death, with conflicting reports on the role of the protein Angiomotin (Amot) in regulating this pathway. This study found that the phosphorylation of Amot at Serine 176 regulates the subcellular localization of an Amot-YAP-Merlin complex and affects YAP’s ability to promote cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Amot is part of the Motin family of proteins, which includes Angiomotin-like 1 (AmotL1) and Angiomotin-like 2 (AmotL2), and is expressed as two isoforms. Structural similarities exist between the Motin family members, but they have distinct functions. Previous studies identified the p130 splice isoform of Amot as a binding partner of YAP and Merlin. YAP plays a significant role in the development of resistance to RAF- and MEK-targeted therapies and cancer relapse in KRAS-driven colon and pancreatic cancers. The tumor suppressor Merlin is inactivated in Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) and is essential for Nf2-/- mice to develop liver tumors; heterozygous deletion of Yap significantly suppresses the loss-of-Nf2 phenotype, implicating YAP as a major downstream effector of NF2. The Hippo-YAP pathway is present in mammals and regulates organ size, cell contact inhibition, proliferation, apoptosis, and polarity. Functions of Merlin have been described in the nucleus as well as at the plasma membrane. Amot regulates collective migration of epithelial cells and is required for endothelial cell migration. Additionally, significantly increased expression of Amot was observed in NF2-null human schwannomas samples, which primarily displayed localization of Amot in the nucleus. Post-translational modification is an explanation for the opposing regulatory functions of Amot, and YAP’s association with Merlin was found to occur
Researchers have discovered an atypical protease called SBT5.2 that controls plant protein and activates defense against disease without using its protease ability. SBT5.2 is produced by two distinct transcriptional strands, one of which, SBT5.2 (b), interacts with a defense-related transcription factor called MYB30, causing it to be excluded from the nucleus, which reduces MYB30's transcriptional activation, suppressed immunity and resistance to pathogens. The dual transcription strands of SBT5.2 indicate a new regulatory mode for subtilase proteins, without which plant immunity affects their physiological and developmental processes.
Researchers have discovered that phosphatidic acid (PA), a naturally occurring lipid found in cell membranes, can regulate the gating of potassium ion channels (Kv channels). The study, which employed the use of planar lipid bilayers to control the protein and lipid components, identified two effects of PA on gating. The first effect is a non-specific electrostatic influence on activation mediated by electric charge density on the extracellular and intracellular membrane surfaces. The second effect is specific to the presence of a primary phosphate group, acts only through the intracellular membrane leaflet, and depends on the presence of a particular arginine residue in the voltage sensor. The findings suggest a novel mechanism of voltage sensor regulation by phosphatidic acid. The study also highlights the importance of the membrane's lipid composition in regulating membrane proteins and ion channels.
Living with relatives can enhance reproduction and survival, but it can also increase susceptibility to pathogens. A comparative meta-analysis was conducted on 56 species of plants, animals, and bacteria to examine whether the benefits of living with relatives offset the harm caused by pathogens. The results showed that high within-group relatedness increases mortality when pathogens are present, but decreases mortality when pathogens are rare, particularly in species that live with kin. Across groups, variation in mortality was lower when relatedness was high, but abundances of pathogens were more variable. The effects of within-group relatedness were only evident when pathogens were experimentally manipulated. The study highlights the importance of kin selection for understanding disease spread in natural populations.
Researchers have used cryo-electron microscopy to determine structures of the primary receptor for nitric oxide in mammals, soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC), in inactive and active states. The sGC-specific stimulator YC-1 induces a conformational change in sGC to an active state, with density consistent with YC-1 observed in the active state map. The cryo-EM images also provide insight into how NO and small molecule stimulators couple binding through the protein for activation. The researchers used Manduca sexta sGC, which is between 36% and 59% sequence identical to the human homologs, to produce the first full-length sGC structures. They found that sGC is a flexible dumbbell-shaped particle with a bridge of coiled-coil domains between the H-NOX/PAS bundle in the regulatory lobe and catalytic domains in the catalytic lobe.
Chronic ethanol consumption can lead to an increased risk of developing pulmonary infections such as Aspergillus infections. However, the mechanisms behind this increased susceptibility are not well understood. A study found that chronic ethanol consumption leads to decreased leukocyte recruitment and activation, impaired phagocytosis and killing functions of neutrophils, and reduced fungal clearance, causing a susceptibility to pulmonary infections. The study also showed that chronic ethanol consumption affects neutrophil recruitment, causing susceptibility to pulmonary Aspergillus fumigatus infection. Moreover, chronic ethanol consumption dysregulates cytokine and chemokine release post A. fumigatus infection, leading to greater levels of inflammation and lung damage. Further, chronic ethanol consumption reduces lymphocytes and IL-17 production, and impairs neutrophil rolling, adhesion, and recruitment in different tissues. The study established a new paradigm in the innate immune response in chronic ethanol consumers, highlighting the importance of understanding the role of neutrophil recruitment and activation in chronic ethanol consumption-related infections.
VEGFR-2 is the primary regulator of angiogenesis, and it has been hypothesized to only form dimers and become activated upon binding with a ligand. However, using quantitative FRET and biochemical analysis, new research shows that VEGFR-2 actually forms dimers in the absence of ligand when expressed at physiological levels and that these dimers are phosphorylated. These inter-receptor contacts are critical for transitioning from the unliganded dimer structure to the ligand-bound active conformation, and a pathogenic C482R VEGFR-2 mutant promotes ligand-independent signalling by mimicking the structure of the ligand-bound VEGFR-2. Angiogenesis is regulated by the ligands and receptors of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signalling network, with VEGFR-2 being the primary regulator of endothelial cell proliferation and migration.
Metformin, a drug commonly used to treat type 2 diabetes, has been found to extend lifespan and delay the onset of age-related diseases, but its primary method of action has remained unclear. In a new study using a pure in vitro reconstitution system, researchers have found that metformin acts through the v-ATPase-Ragulator lysosomal pathway to coordinate mTORC1 and AMPK, two hubs governing metabolic programs. The researchers also show in Caenorhabditis elegans that both v-ATPase-mediated TORC1 inhibition and v-ATPase-AXIN/LKB1-mediated AMPK activation contribute to the lifespan extension effect of metformin. Understanding the molecular mechanism of metformin's healthspan extension could lead to its more effective use in treating human aging and age-related diseases.
Researchers have discovered that cephalopod mollusks evolved their arms and tentacles using the same signaling networks as vertebrates and arthropods, despite their evolutionary separation. This suggests that cephalopod limbs evolved through a parallel activation of a genetic program for appendage development present in the bilaterian common ancestor. Analysis of cuttlefish embryos revealed the localization of clusters of mitotic cells in each limb primordium, proving that the initiation of limb outgrowth was caused by localized cell proliferation. Furthermore, the study identified orthologs of genes that pattern the three axes of vertebrate and arthropod limbs, and tested the spatial and temporal expression patterns of these genes during cuttlefish limb development. The study found that genes that pattern the proximodistal axis showed similarly polarized patterns of expression along the proximodistal axis of cuttlefish limb buds, and that anteroposteriorly restricted activation of the Hedgehog pathway is a conserved feature of cephalopod, arthropod, and vertebrate limb development. However, the polarity of the signaling center is reversed in cephalopod limbs.
The study investigates the molecular mechanisms that lead to the formation and maintenance of benign melanocytic nevi, which arise due to an acquired BRAFV600E mutation in melanocytes triggering unchecked proliferation followed by arrest. The study identified a set of microRNAs, including MIR211-5p and MIR328-3p, as highly expressed nevus-enriched transcripts that induced proliferation arrest in human melanocytes through targeting of AURKB. The study found that BRAFV600E expression in primary human melanocytes stimulated either arrest or proliferation depending on the differentiation state of the melanocyte. The study highlights a novel molecular mechanism for melanocytic nevus formation that is congruent with both experimental and clinical observations.
A virulent strain of a DNA virus that infects multiple Drosophila species has recurrently evolved at least four times in the past ~30,000 years, three times in Arizona and once in another geographically distinct species. The higher titer viral type suppresses the host-immune system and has increased virulence compared to the low viral titer type. Viruses co-evolve with their hosts and these studies are necessary to help characterize the pathways viruses have evolved to escape or suppress the host-immune system, and whether the same host pathways are common targets of the same virus. The study identified two viral multilocus genotypes that differ by 11 focal SNPs and found that these viral types are maintained within the same host population and across multiple isolated host populations. These SNPs are tightly linked and likely brought together by a combination of recurrent mutation and recombination, and this linkage appears to be maintained by strong selection. One viral type is associated with 100-fold higher viral titer and increased virulence compared to the other.
The study examined motor cortical activity during speech production using electrode arrays to record from the motor cortex 'hand knob' in two people with tetraplegia. The results showed that neurons modulate during speaking and non-speaking movements of the tongue, lips, and jaw, challenging the conventional model of a 'motor homunculus.' The study demonstrated the potential for intracortical recordings for brain-computer interfaces to restore speech. Neural population dynamics features previously reported for arm movements were also present during speaking. Speaking requires coordinating numerous articulator muscles with exquisite timing and precision, and understanding its neural underpinnings is critical for identifying and treating speech disorders and building brain-computer interfaces to restore lost speech.
Homologous recombination (HR) is essential for maintaining genome stability and Rad51 is the key protein that drives HR, but multiple auxiliary factors interact with Rad51 to potentiate its activity. A conserved acidic patch of Rad51 is identified and proposed to be a fundamental motif that facilitates interactions with auxiliary factors and is therefore essential for recombinational DNA repair. Defects in HR lead to genome instability, which drives human diseases such as cancer. Multiple auxillary factors are required for HR and our understanding of how they promote Rad51 activity remains incomplete. The acidic patch of Rad51 is essential for interaction with Rad55-Rad57 and essential for the interaction with Rad52. The acidic patch is important for the interaction with multiple auxiliary factors.
A team of scientists have developed a tool which can manipulate cellular PI (4,5)P2 levels and distinguish their function from those of its metabolites in fast cellular reactions. The caged, membrane permeant PI (4,5)P2 generates physiologically active PI (4,5)P2 with sub-second temporal precision and can uncover their rapid effects on cellular processes and identify lipid effectors. The tool also discovered that PI (4,5)P2, but not diacylglycerols (DAGs), induces the rapid exocytosis of a few vesicles from the Readily Releasable Pool (RRP). This tool can be used to investigate relevant interactions in fast biological reactions like neurosecretion.
A new study has found that cells have a unique response to the creation of a specific unfolded protein - a response that is different to the known heat-shock response (HSR) and the other unfolded protein responses (UPRs). By analysing the response to engineered proteins called 'destabilising domains', scientists discovered that the ability of cells to handle a single unfolded protein is important to their survival, highlighting the importance of protein quality control networks. 
The document explains how receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are able to determine different cell-fate decisions even though they share the same signaling cascades. The study focuses on the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and explores its distribution in endosomes, as the concept of signaling in endosomes has been previously proposed. Using FRET microscopy, the study found that p-EGFR is packaged at constant mean amounts in endosomes and that cells increase the number of endosomes in response to higher EGF concentrations, while keeping the mean p-EGFR content constant. Mathematical modeling found that this mechanism provides both robustness and regulation to signaling output, and that changing the distribution of p-EGFR between endosomes is sufficient to reprogram cell-fate decision upon EGF stimulation. The study hypothesizes that the tight control of the endosomal distribution of EGF could serve to regulate signal transmission.
A recent study has shown that animal cells within a tissue exhibit uniformity in their size, and to identify the molecular mechanisms responsible for this, a large-scale small molecule screen was performed. The study found that the p38 MAPK pathway is involved in coordinating cell size and cell cycle progression, as small cells display higher p38 activity and spend more time in G1 than larger cells, thus resulting in uniformity in cell size. This finding contradicts the skepticism that existed previously, concerning the coordination between cell size and cell cycle in animal cells. The study also found that the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway regulates cell size, but not the coordination of cell size with the length of G1. The p38 pathway, on the other hand, helps in promoting cell size uniformity.
The overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins MCL1 and Bcl-xL is common in many cancers, but inhibitors targeting MCL1 can face intrinsic resistance. Researchers identified three components of a cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex (CRL5) that can resensitize cancer cells to MCL1 inhibition. Levels of the BH3-only pro-apoptotic proteins Bim and Noxa are proteasomally regulated by the CRL5 complex. This discovery suggests CRL5 can be used in combination therapies to treat otherwise resistant cancers. Knockdown or inhibition of CUL5, RNF7 and UBE2F resensitize cancer cells to both MCL1 and CDK9 inhibitors. This shows the need to uncover additional targets that may sensitise cells to cancer treatments.
Cyanobacteria produce sulfated extracellular polysaccharides that contribute to biofilm formation, stress tolerance, and infectivity. However, little is known about their biosynthesis and function. Researchers identified a whole set of genes responsible for the biosynthesis of sulfated extracellular polysaccharides in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 and discovered a two-step culture regime for reproducible formation of bloom-like cell aggregates embedded in sulfated extracellular polysaccharides. They also identified a transcriptional regulatory system involved in sulfated extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis. The findings offer a potential for elucidation of various sulfated polysaccharides, their functions, and their potential application in biotechnology.
Researchers have developed a high-throughput functional genomics approach for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, combining inducible CRISPR-interference and image-based analyses of morphological features and sub-cellular chromosomal localizations in the related non-pathogen, M.smegmatis. They apply automated imaging and analysis to 263 essential gene knockdown mutants in an arrayed library, deriving robust, quantitative descriptions of bacillary morphologies consequent on gene silencing. Leveraging statistical learning, they demonstrate that functionally related genes cluster by morphotypic similarity and infer the existence of a mycobacterial restriction-modification system, as well as identifying filamentation as a defining mycobacterial response to histidine starvation. The researchers suggest that the approach could have utility in elucidating antibiotic mechanism-of-action studies and could improve our understanding of mycobacterial metabolic and cellular functions impacting pathogenicity and drug susceptibility.
B lymphocytes use B cell receptors (BCRs) to detect antigens, but it is unclear how the sensitivity and threshold for activation of BCRs resulting from stimulation by mechanical forces are regulated. A study addressed this issue by using a double-stranded DNA-based tension gauge tether system serving as a predefined mechanical force gauge ranging from 12 to 56 pN. It was found that IgM-BCR activation is dependent on mechanical forces and exhibits a multi-threshold effect, while the activation of isotype-switched IgG- or IgE-BCR only requires a low threshold of less than 12 pN, providing an explanation for their rapid activation in response to antigen stimulation. The cytoplasmic tail of the IgG-BCR heavy chain is both required and sufficient to account for the low mechanical force threshold. These results help to define mechanical force sensitivity and threshold required to activate different isotyped BCRs. Physical cues such as mechanical force deliver important external information regulating B cell activation and subsequent responses, along with chemical cues.
The study examines whether dopamine regulates synapse formation in the developing striatum. Results suggest that the coordinated actions of glutamate and postsynaptic Gαs-coupled receptors promote rapid synaptogenesis in striatal spiny projection neurons (SPNs). Furthermore, dopamine is shown to modulate activity-dependent striatal plasticity and synapse formation in early postnatal development. In vivo treatment with the dopamine receptor agonists enhances excitatory synapses on direct pathway SPNs, whereas rapid production of excitatory synapses on indirect pathway neurons requires the activation of Gαs GPCRs in SPNs of both pathways. The study was conducted in mice during the second postnatal week of life, which is a period of rapid growth of excitatory synapses on SPNs. Results suggest a potentially general mechanism of developmental synaptogenesis that relies on the coordinated actions of glutamate and the activation of PKA via Gαs-coupled receptors.
NK cell education is a process by which inhibitory NK cell receptors protect cellular responsiveness. While the molecular mechanisms behind NK cell education have been unclear, recent research has shown that mTOR/Akt pathway basal activity is heightened by a number of educating receptors. This higher activity is necessary for optimal reactive NK cells as it enhances calcium flux and LFA-1 integrin activation. Additionally, pharmacological inhibition of mTOR results in decreases in NK cell reactivity, while acute cytokine stimulation restores NK cell reactivity. The study also found that the inhibitory signaling module downstream of NKirs is necessary to maintain reactivity. As such, physical interactions between NKirs, their ligands, and MHC class I molecules are necessary for optimal cellular responsiveness. High activity of the Akt/mTOR pathway is a hallmark of reactive NK cells, controlled by SHP-1-dependent signaling downstream of NKirs. Chronic engagement of NKar negatively affects the basal activity of the Akt/mTOR pathway, leading to decreased reactivity. The process of education is not a discrete but rather a continuous process and absence of one or two of the educating NKir results in a loss of mTOR activity. A higher level of mTOR baseline activity is required for optimal NK cell reactivity, with pharmacological inhibition leading to decreased responsive NK cells.
This study uses synchrotron microtomography to analyze the developmental relationship between teeth and dermal odontodes in the Late Silurian jawbone of Lophosteus superbus, the most basal stem osteichthyan. The study finds a developmental relationship between teeth and dermal odontodes that suggests they are modifications of a single system, regulated and differentiated by oral and dermal epithelia. The study also provides insight into the evolution of teeth and dermal odontodes by examining the marginal dentition of early jawed vertebrates, particularly the stem gnathostomes and stem osteichthyans. The study finds that Lophosteus is the least crownward of known stem osteichthyans and uniquely informative about the evolution of the osteichthyan dentition. The study provides a detailed analysis of the dental ontogeny of Lophosteus, including the formation of founder ridges and the cyclic replacement of teeth. The study also compares Lophosteus with other early jawed vertebrates, including Andreolepis and Kosoraspis to show the evolutionary relationships between teeth and dermal odontodes.
The human protein kinase C (PKC) family has been identified as a regulator of the assembly of large ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) required for influenza virus replication. The PKCs, particularly PKCδ, interact with the viral polymerase subunit PB2 and explore the oligomeric state of the nucleoprotein (NP) to regulate RNP assembly during infection. The knockout of PKCδ impairs virus infection as it disrupts genome replication. Influenza virus exploits the host PKCs to regulate RNP assembly, a necessary step for the transition from primary transcription to genome replication during the infectious cycle. The reversible phosphorylation of NP must be handled with care to enable the recruitment of oligomerization-competent NP to sites of genome replication and incorporation into growing RNPs. PKC isoforms and not other fortuitously co-precipitating kinases directly phosphorylate NP in vitro.
Transmissible cancers have been identified in Tasmanian devils, dogs, and four bivalve species. This study investigated disseminated neoplasia affecting geographically distant populations of two species of mussels and found evidence of a single transmissible cancer lineage affecting both. This cancer lineage likely arose from a third mussel species and has independently crossed into two new host species, been transferred across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, and between the Northern and Southern hemispheres. The cancer lineage in these mussels is distinct from previously identified transmissible cancer lineages. Overall, this newly identified cancer lineage has an independent origin and arose from a different individual than the previously identified cancer lineage.
This document discusses the emergence of neuronal timescales in the human cortex and their relevance for cognition. The authors infer these timescales from invasive intracranial recordings and show that timescales increase along the principal sensorimotor-to-association axis across the entire human cortex and align with macroscopic gradients of gray matter myelination and synaptic receptor and ion channel gene expression. Neuronal timescales are also functionally dynamic, expanding during working memory maintenance and predicting individual performance, while cortex-wide timescales compress with aging. The authors demonstrate a close correspondence between neuronal timescales and single-unit spiking timescales in macaque studies. Ultimately, the authors suggest that neuronal timescales follow cytoarchitectonic gradients across the human cortex and are relevant for cognition in both short and long terms, bridging microcircuit physiology with macroscale dynamics and behavior.
A study on the marine mollusk Aplysia californica has challenged the idea that memory is stored in synapses. The researchers found that two treatments which disrupt long-term memory (reconsolidation blockade and inhibition of PKM) caused synaptic changes to revert back to their original state, but not by targeted retraction of specific synapses. These results suggest that the persistence of memory does not require stability of specific connections. In addition, the study found evidence that the locus of the engram (the physical trace of a memory) in Aplysia may reside in the nucleus of neurons rather than in synapses.
The organization of microtubules (MTs) in neurons plays a critical role in intracellular transport and the distribution of cellular materials. The molecular mechanisms and functional significance of MT organization in neurons, particularly of dendrites, has been unknown. However, a recent study published in eLife demonstrates that kinesin-1 is critical in establishing the characteristic minus-end-out MT organization of the dendrite in vivo. In unc-116 (kinesin-1/kinesin heavy chain) mutants, dendritic MTs adopt an axonal-like plus-end-out organization. The study proposes that kinesin-1 regulates dendrite MT polarity by directly gliding the plus-end-out MTs out of the dendrite using both the motor domain and the C-terminal MT-binding domain. Referring to the signature pattern of MT polarity, the authors highlight the instrumental role that it could play in the establishment of neuronal polarity. This study provides a molecular-level insight into how transport-essential MT polarity is established and maintained in dendrites, and thus helps to understand neuronal transport in normal and pathological contexts.
Activation of the P2X7 receptor releases CD14 in extracellular vesicles, which reduces macrophage membrane CD14 and affects LPS-induced but not monophosphoryl lipid A-induced cytokine production. During sepsis, P2X7 receptor activity maintains elevated levels of CD14 in biological fluids, promoting bacterial clearance and preventing organ damage. P2X7 receptor is a key receptor in modulating macrophage functions that orchestrate inflammatory response, inducing the release of extracellular vesicles with different cellular proteins. CD14 is a co-receptor of TLR4 important for LPS signaling and is released during infection for host defense. The P2X7 receptor contributes to the presence of extracellular CD14 in extracellular vesicles during infection, and its deficiency impairs LPS-signaling in vivo. Extracellular CD14 is essential in the P2X7 receptor secretome to control bacterial dissemination and cytokine production during sepsis, and its deficiency is detrimental for survival.
Researchers have analysed the genome architecture and gene family diversity of ancestral premetazoans, in order to date the emergence of animal-like traits. They found that prior to the emergence of complex multicellularity, the earliest animals had already undergone dynamic changes in genome architecture, with an early burst of gene diversity in the ancestor of Holozoa, enriched in transcription factors and cell adhesion machinery, followed by multiple and differently-timed episodes of synteny disruption, intron gain and genome expansions. These findings emphasise the importance of a unicellular perspective to understand early animal evolution. The study involved a comparative analysis of genomes from animals and their closest unicellular relatives (the Holozoa), including four newly-sequenced genomes.
Cilia and flagella are important organelles found in a wide range of eukaryotic cells, playing various roles such as cellular motility, sensory reception, and developmental signaling. The assembly of these organelles is mainly done through a process known as intraflagellar transport (IFT), which relies on kinesin-2 and cytoplasmic dynein-1b/2 motors. The IFT particles are composed of at least 20 different proteins and can be divided into two different complexes known as complex A and complex B. Inactivation of IFT-B proteins or the kinesin motor results in the failure to construct the flagellum, whereas IFT-A proteins and the IFT dynein contribute to retrograde transport. Among these proteins is IFT27, a member of the IFT-B complex in Trypanosoma brucei, which is found to be essential for retrograde cargo transport due to its role in the import of both the IFT-A complex and IFT dynein motors. Additionally, IFT27 plays a role in the assembly of the IFT-B complex and travels by IFT along the flagellum.
The use of mucosal vaccines is more effective in developing protective immunity against mucosal pathogens, and the potential usage in developing countries and emergencies is seen as practical due to low cost and ease of administration. Mucosal adjuvants, which are needed to make these vaccines more effective, have struggled to be developed due to safety concerns. Recent studies have suggested that a bacterial signaling molecule called cyclic di-GMP (CDG) is a promising mucosal vaccine adjuvant. However, its in vivo mechanisms have been unclear. In this study, it has been found that CDG elicits stronger antibody and T helper responses than the mammalian 2′3′-cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), and generates better protection against Streptococcus pneumoniae infection than the cGAMP adjuvanted vaccine. Two in vivo mechanisms of CDG have been identified, which involves (i) an enhancement in antigen uptake and (ii) selective activation of DCs, which are associated with TH cytokine production. The study has suggested that CDG could be a potent mucosal vaccine adjuvant, replacing conventional adjuvants such as cholera toxin, which has associated toxicity concerns.
A study of 831 participants in the Human Connectome Project has found that smokers have low functional connectivity in the brain, particularly of the lateral orbitofrontal cortex, which is linked to non-reward mechanisms. Participants who drank heavily had increases in resting state functional connectivity and specifically in reward-related systems including the medial orbitofrontal cortex and the cingulate cortex. The study also found increased impulsivity in smokers, associated with decreased connectivity of the non-reward-related lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Impulsivity was also found in high-drinkers, associated with increased connectivity of the reward-related medial orbitofrontal cortex. The findings were cross-validated by an independent longitudinal dataset with 1176 participants, showing that brain functional connectivities play a role in smoking and drinking, together with other factors.
This study seeks a novel approach to investigating the neural processes associated with conscious perception, tracking the neuronal coding of consciously and unconsciously perceived contents during a "blindsight" task in which participants were asked to report the spatial location and visibility of a briefly presented target, keeping behavior identical. EEG and MEG recordings were taken and multivariate pattern analysis demonstrated that information about spatial location traverses the cortex on blindsight trials but that information unique to consciously perceived stimuli emerges in superior parietal and superior frontal regions. Conscious access appears to characterize the entry of the perceived stimulus into a series of additional brain processes, each restricted in time, while the failure of conscious access results in the breaking of this chain and a subsequent slow decay of the lingering unconscious activity. The study highlights the importance of tracking the temporal propagation of conscious and unconscious information in the brain and probing the presence of additional stimulus-specific cortical codes on seen trials relative to unseen trials while excluding any difference in perception and behavior.
X-ray free electron lasers (XFELs) have the potential to determine difficult-to-solve macromolecular crystal structures. However, previous studies have involved the collection of thousands to millions of diffraction images. To improve and reduce the number of observations needed, a new post-refinement procedure has been developed specifically for diffraction data from still images collected from crystals in random orientations. This procedure significantly improves the quality of the diffraction data from XFEL diffraction experiments with crystals of three different proteins, and complete data sets can be obtained from a smaller number of diffraction images. This development will help make XFEL crystallography accessible to challenging problems in biology, including those with a limited sample quantity.
A study has found that different kinds of photoreceptor cells use different types of opsins, including ciliary and rhabdomeric opsins. However, the co-expression of rhabdomeric opsin and a visual pigment of the recently described xenopsins has been observed in larval eyes of a mollusk, suggesting that frequent opsin gene loss had a large influence on the evolution, organization and function of brain and eye photoreceptor cells. It was previously believed that gradual change was the main driving force in the evolution of light-detecting cell types, but the findings suggest that frequent lineage-specific loss of c-opsins and xenopsins were also important players in animal eye evolution. Introns were found to be highly conserved and specific exon-intron patterns for many major opsin groups, providing strong evidence that xenopsins and c-opsins are indeed distinct opsin subgroups, irrespective of their mutually exclusive distribution amongst bilaterian animals.
The development of auditory function in mammals, particularly the connections between mechanosensory hair cells and afferent spiral ganglion neurons, is still largely unknown. Type 1 spiral ganglion neurons must connect with inner hair cells, while avoiding connections with outer hair cells, and the factors that mediate this pattern are unknown. Through experiments on mice, researchers have discovered that some type 1 neurons contact outer hair cells before forming synapses with inner hair cells, and the expression of Semaphorin-3F in the outer hair cell region inhibits type 1 neuron process extension. The study provides insight into the molecular mechanisms controlling the formation of the auditory system.
A highly evolved RNA polymerase ribozyme has been found to function as a reverse transcriptase, a process previously thought to be exclusive to DNA. This activity is believed to have played a crucial role in the transition from RNA to DNA genomes during the early history of life on Earth. The reverse transcriptase ribozyme can incorporate all four dNTPs and generate products containing up to 32 deoxynucleotides, opening up possibilities for the synthesis of complete DNA genomes. This discovery provides a bridge between ancestral and contemporary genetic material, enabling the transmission of genetic information without the need for proteins. Through many successive generations of in vitro evolution, the class I polymerase ribozyme has been progressively refined and optimized to achieve this capability.
Researchers have identified a mechanism by which cancer cells avoid programmed cell death, or apoptosis, and resist chemotherapy by evading the pro-apoptotic effects of BH3-mimetic drugs. The investigation, published in Cell Reports, examines Bim, a pro-apoptotic protein that normally helps initiate cell death. Bim has been found to contain two binding sites for the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-XL and Bcl-2, which allow it to double-bolt lock the protein complexes and make them resistant to BH3-mimetic drugs. The study highlights the potential for targeting both sites in order to kill cancer cells more selectively.
Researchers have developed a novel genetically encoded calcium (Ca2+) indicator called 'Salsa6f', which can track cytosolic Ca2+ changes while being used for cell tracking, and functioned well in T cell receptors in immune cells. The researchers also generated a transgenic Ca2+ reporter mouse that expresses Salsa6f in specific cell types, enabling ratiometric imaging of Ca2+ signals in complex tissue environments found in vivo. Salsa6f is a fusion of green GCaMP6f and red fluorescent protein tdTomato, which enables true ratiometric imaging in conjunction with the high dynamic range of GCaMP6. The study showed that transgenic expression of Salsa6f in mice enabled ratiometric imaging of Ca2+ signals in complex tissue environments found in vivo. The researchers conclude that Salsa6f is an ideal tool for monitoring Ca2+ signaling in T cells in vivo and in vitro.
A study was conducted to determine if genes containing causal variation for Arabidopsis thaliana defensive compounds, glucosinolates (GSL), control field fitness and are therefore subject to natural selection. The study looked at lines that varied in only specific causal genes to directly test this. The results showed that variations in these naturally polymorphic GSL genes affected fitness in each environment but had fluctuating patterns, with no GSL genotype or genotypes consistently out-performing the others. This suggests that environmental heterogeneity may contribute to the maintenance of GSL variation observed within Arabidopsis thaliana. The study highlights the significance of identifying and cloning the causal genes underlying phenotypic variation to resolve discrepancies between theory and empirical observation.
Researchers have investigated the integration of visual information between different areas of the brain using neuroimaging during rest conditions and whilst participants were watching naturalistic movies. The study found that the correlation pattern between areas is reflective of the underlying receptive field organization, with higher correlations observed between cortical sites containing overlapping representations of visual space. The correlation pattern also reflected the underlying widespread eccentricity organization of visual cortex, with the highest correlations observed for cortical sites with iso-eccentricity representations. This suggests that an intrinsic functional architecture supports the integration of information across functionally specialized visual areas. The study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the relationship between the spatial pattern of correlated BOLD signal and the retinotopic organization of eight visual areas. Correlation patterns were consistent across subjects and experiments.
Wnt proteins have important roles in development and in various diseases, but their hydrophobic nature has made them difficult to study. Previous methods of purifying Wnt proteins have relied on removing lipids from the serum, but a new study has found that the protein afamin is responsible for solubilizing Wnt proteins, enabling them to be purified and studied in aqueous environments. The researchers purified Wnt3a, which forms a 1:1 complex with afamin, and demonstrated that the complex remains soluble in aqueous buffer after isolation and can induce signaling in various cellular systems. The afamin-Wnt complex can be easily obtained in large quantities, allowing for the thorough biochemical scrutiny of various Wnt ligands and their signaling mechanisms that had been difficult for years. This research has important implications for understanding the role of Wnt proteins in various biological processes with medical relevance, including bone formation, immune regulation, cancer, and stem cell renewal.
The 26S proteasome is a multi-enzyme complex that functions as the primary degradation machinery for selective turnover of proteins within the cell. The complex is responsible for the ATP-dependent degradation of polyubiquitinated cellular proteins. The regulatory particle, comprising the ‘base’ and ‘lid’ subcomplexes, acts as a gateway for targeted protein substrates. The lid subcomplex contains the deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) Rpn11 that cleaves polyubiquitin chains from targeted substrates. Prior to the lid's incorporation into the proteasome, Rpn11's deubiquitinase activity is inhibited to prevent unwarranted deubiquitination of proteins. Here, cryo-electron microscopy was used to present the atomic model of the isolated lid subcomplex in yeast, revealing how Rpn11 is inhibited through its interaction with a neighboring lid subunit, Rpn5. Through mutagenesis of specific residues, the network of interactions that are required to stabilize this inhibited state are described, outlining the conformational rearrangements that occur during incorporation of the lid into the 26S holoenzyme, ultimately activating Rpn11 for substrate degradation.
NusG proteins are involved in regulating gene expression by coupling transcription to downstream processes such as RNA translation, processing and folding. While NusG proteins are known to enhance transcript elongation, the mechanisms by which they do so are not well understood. The authors of this study investigated the effect of E. coli NusG on transcript elongation using a synthetic nucleic acid scaffold containing a TEC with fully complementary transcription bubbles flanked by 20-nucleotide DNA duplexes upstream and downstream. They found that NusG did not affect the on-pathway kinetics of transcript elongation but instead slowed down cleavage of nascent RNA by inhibiting backtracking, a pause event in transcription where RNA polymerase backtracks on the DNA template. This activity was found to be independent of the gate and rudder loops, but partially dependent on the lid loop. The authors also mapped the upstream fork junction and determined that NusG inhibits backtracking by stabilizing the minimal transcription bubble. The study suggests that NusG enhances transcript elongation by restricting the conformational flexibility of RNAP β’clamp and reduces the frequency and duration of backtracked pauses.
COVID-19 CG is a resource for tracking SARS-CoV-2 mutations, lineages, and clades using data from the GISAID database. The site allows users to filter by location, date, gene, and mutation of interest, providing a useful tool for projects on SARS-CoV-2 transmission, diagnostics, therapeutics, vaccines, and intervention tracking. The site provides case studies in which users can interrogate SNVs in the SARS-CoV-2 to inform the design and testing of therapeutics, SNVs that may impact the sensitivity of commonly used diagnostic primers, and the emergence of a dominant lineage harboring an S477N RBD mutation in Australia in 2020. COVID-19 CG will be upgraded to accelerate COVID-19 efforts and pinpoint mutations as the virus evolves. However, researchers must interpret the data carefully as inconsistent sampling, sampling biases, and differences in founder host population traits could influence the global distribution of SNVs.
Patients with DYT1 dystonia, a rare motor disorder caused by a single gene mutation, were found to take more risks during an operant-learning task with probabilistic rewards when compared to healthy controls. This was attributed to alterations in corticostriatal plasticity, specifically, abnormal strengthening of long-term potentiation and weakening of long-term depression in corticostriatal synapses, which is suggested to affect reinforcement learning through dopamine-dependent synaptic plasticity. The findings support the notion that striatal plasticity shapes choice behaviour in humans. However, the contribution of dopamine-modulated corticostriatal plasticity to shaping action needs to be further investigated.
A new study has uncovered a distinct way in which chromosome lagging affects plant cells versus animal cells. The researchers observed that knockdown of several kinetochore proteins led to polyploidy (multiple copies of each chromosome), not aneuploidy (abnormal number of chromosomes), through cytokinesis (the process of cell division) failure, with >90% of the cells exhibiting lagging chromosomes for several minutes or longer. The resultant cells, containing two or more nuclei, proceeded to the next cell cycle and eventually developed into polyploid plants. This raises a possibility that they could be one of the natural pathways to polyploidy in plants. The data obtained applies broadly to flowering plants, including crop species.
A study has found that chronic stress in female rats leads to reproductive dysfunction, resulting in fewer successful copulations, fewer pregnancies and increased embryo resorption. The study also found that stress causes elevated expression of the hormone RFamide-related peptide-3 (RFRP3), which inhibits fertility. However, genetic silencing of RFRP3 using an inducible-targeted shRNA alleviates stress-induced infertility in female rats. These findings suggest that RFRP3 is a potential clinically relevant single target for stress-induced infertility in humans.
Researchers have examined the development of pectoral fins in catsharks and discovered a shift in the anterior-posterior patterning system relative to mouse limb buds. This suggests that a key genetic event of the fin-to-limb transformation was the alteration of the anterior-posterior patterning network. Changes in regulatory interactions between transcriptional factors may therefore be key players for patterning changes during evolution. The study also found that the regulatory interaction between Hand2 and Gli3 seen in tetrapods is weak or non-existent in chondrichthyans, indicating a general posterior shift of anterior-posterior positional values in sharks.
Researchers have established a murine lung-on-chip infection model to study Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection dynamics, with a spatiotemporal resolution unattainable in animal models. They use time-lapse imaging to reveal the direct role of pulmonary surfactant in early infection and found that surfactant deficiency results in rapid and uncontrolled bacterial growth in both macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells. The study shows that surfactant partially removes virulence-associated lipids and proteins from the bacterial cell surface and may partly explain the increased risk of active tuberculosis in individuals with compromised surfactant function. The researchers conclude that the lung-on-chip infection model is useful for studying the dynamics of host-pathogen interactions in a realistic physiological setting.
RNA granules are dynamic structures that contain RNA and RNA-binding proteins, and are involved in mRNA transport, storage, degradation, and translation regulation. P granules, which are the germ granules of the Worm Caenorhabditis elegans and are involved in fertility and embryonic germline segregation, behave like liquid droplets, and their assembly and disassembly is regulated by phosphorylation. In this study, a group of intrinsically disordered, serine-rich proteins called the maternal-effect germline defective (MEG) proteins were identified as regulators of P granule dynamics in C. elegans embryos. MEG-1 and MEG-3 were found to be substrates of the kinase MBK-2/DYRK and the phosphatase PP2APPTR−½. Phosphorylation promotes granule disassembly, while dephosphorylation promotes granule assembly. The study provides insight into the molecular mechanisms that regulate RNA granule dynamics.
A study has found that when cells are faced with unfavorable conditions, they can enter into a dormant state called dormancy, in which the mobility of organelles and foreign tracer particles decreases due to an influx of protons which acidifies the cytoplasm. This leads to an assembly of proteins which triggers a transition of the cytoplasm to a solid-like state that has increased mechanical stability, and which is required for cellular survival under starvation. The cytoplasm is an adaptable fluid that can reversibly transition into a protective solid-like state. However, how cells enter into and recover from dormancy remains poorly understood. The authors studied dormancy in different eukaryotic organisms and propose a change in the cytoplasm's physicochemical properties, causing an adaptive shift to protect the cell from extreme environmental conditions.
Researchers have identified a new fear response in female rats termed "darting," which occurs during the conditioning stage of fear association, triggered by a conditioned stimulus (CS), and disappears during extinction. This response was not previously identified as a measure of fear conditioning in rodent models that rely primarily on freezing responses. The novelty of this finding suggests that conditioned fear behavior may be more diverse than previously thought, especially in female rats, and that they may employ more adaptive fear response strategies that improve long-term outcomes. The study also shows that female rats are more likely to dart compared to males and that the distinct and adaptive fear response strategies employed by females mean that they differ from males in fear response. Specifically, a significant number of female rats exhibit darting as an extension of the CS session, which relates to a conserved conditioned response. The study suggests that darting should be included in the measure of fear response in rodent models, especially in females, and may lead to a re-interpretation of previous studies.
A study by researchers at the University of Warwick has found the molecular basis for a mechanism which initiates the inhibition of the process of cell division - mitosis - when cellular nutrients are poor. In addition to it being a fundamental process of life, the research has potential for development of targeted cancer therapies. Making sure that equal numbers of chromosomes – packaged as DNA – are passed to both daughter cells when a cell divides is an important process that takes place in all our cells. This chromosome segregation must happen perfectly to guard against diseases such as cancer, so upholding mitosis has to be an essential part of a cell’s lifecycle. The research team, revealing their findings in the journal Current Biology, have shown that when conditions are harsh and the cell wants to initiate protection measures, a signalling pathway is activated, which in turn inhibits the ability of the cell to undergo mitosis. Understanding this process in more detail gives scientists a basis for researching the development of targeted cancer therapies.
Researchers have discovered a new mutation that can make Prostate Cancer cells resistant to enzalutamide, second-generation antiandrogen therapy. They have found that F876L mutation converts enzalutamide into an androgen receptor agonist. As a result, the cells are no longer growth inhibited and continue to grow, leading to more advanced disease. Despite the promising results, patient responses to enzalutamide are varied and often short lived. Through the study, researchers have developed a novel screening method to prospectively identify AR mutations that confer resistance to enzalutamide. This could lead to more targeted therapies for the treatment of prostate cancer.
An oscillating network within cells called the Transcription Factor (TF) functions to segment time and provide opportunities for decisions. It moves periodically between the cytoplasm and the nucleus and is responsible for the regulation of genetic circuits which in turn control transcriptional responses to different stimuli. Recent investigations into NF-kB (a protein that plays significant roles in inflammation and cancer, crucial for the transcription of numerous genes), demonstrated that it displays sustained oscillations that can be entrained or reach a persistent synchronized state through small periodic perturbations, despite uncertainty surrounding the biological advantage of these oscillations. The process of entrainment, in which an oscillator can gradually modulate its phase and frequency, is a feature of free oscillating systems in genetic circuits which uses periodic perturbations to synchronize multiple oscillators to create collective dynamical states. In addition to simpler biological organisms, oscillatory dynamics within mammalian cells have also been observed that provide insights into the ways in which these cells transmit information through biochemical networks. 

Guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs) are essential for immunity against intracellular pathogens, particularly for Toxoplasma gondii control. A study investigated the molecular interactions and function of murine GBPs (mGBP1/2/3/5/6) and the mutational, Multiparameter Fluorescence Image Spectroscopy, and live cell microscopy methodologies used to investigate homo- and hetero-multimerization properties of mGBP2 in parasite killing. Results show that mGBP2 requires GTP hydrolysis and isoprenylation for T. gondii control, and undergoes structural transitions between monomeric, dimeric and oligomeric states. Furthermore, mGBP2 multimerization and attack on the PVM and plasma membrane of the parasite involves various interaction partners and is governed by multimerization affinities of mGBP complexes. Overall, the study provides important insights into the dynamics and intracellular interactions of mGBP effector molecules in T. gondii host defense. 
The study investigates de novo mutations (DNMs) in human gametes, which are mutations that occur spontaneously in the genome of an offspring that are not inherited from either parent. The study analyzed sequencing data from 33 large, three-generation families and observed significant variability in parental age effects on DNM counts across families. The study also identified that ~3% of DNMs originated following primordial germ cell specification in a parent, and differed from non-mosaic germline DNMs in their mutational spectra. Additionally, the study discovered that nearly 10% of candidate DNMs in the second generation were post-zygotic, and present in both somatic and germ cells; these gonosomal mutations occurred at equivalent frequencies on both parental haplotypes. The study found that rates of germline mutation accumulation vary among families with similar ancestry, and confirm that post-zygotic mosaicism is a substantial source of human DNM. The study demonstrates that the rate at which germline mutations occur is important for understanding the timing and complexity of human evolution and demography as well as the key role of spontaneous mutation in human disease. The study concludes that the paternal and maternal age effects on de novo mutation accumulation confirm prior estimates and further suggest that both older mothers and fathers contribute to increased DNM counts in children. The study found that the mutational spectra of DNMs differed in the male and female germlines. The study also investigated parental age effects on mutation counts within individual families and found significant variability between families.
The coactivator complexes SAGA and NuA4 stimulate transcription by modifying chromatin, and both contain the highly-conserved Tra1 subunit, which is a direct target for multiple sequence-specific activators. The Cryo-EM structure of Saccharomyces cerevisisae Tra1 has been determined, revealing an extensive network of alpha-helical solenoids organized into a diamond ring conformation, similar to DNA-PKcs, indicating a direct role for Tra1 in DNA repair. Tra1 is essential for coactivator function, as a direct target for multiple activators. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of Tra1 coactivator interaction is a major challenge, and the reason for its common integration within multiple complexes is unclear. Tra1 is present in other chromatin-related complexes, making understanding its interaction of utmost importance.
Mutations in the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) gene have been linked to acquired resistance to endocrine therapies in breast cancer. Specifically, the Y537S and D538G mutations have been shown to confer ERα constitutive activity and resistance to antiestrogen therapy. Biophysical and structural biology data reveal that these mutations alter the conformational dynamics of the loop connecting Helix 11 and Helix 12 in the ligand-binding domain of ERα, which leads to a stabilized agonist state and altered antagonist state that resists inhibition. The mutations reduce the affinity for estrogen agonist and antagonist, while simultaneously increasing the recruitment of coactivators in the absence of hormone. Collectively, these data suggest that the combination of increased coactivator recruitment and reduced antiestrogen-binding affinity underlie the hormone therapy resistance conferred by these H12 ERα mutations.
Researchers have identified a “genetic lifespan calendar” that could be used to explain how behaviours mature and diseases are triggered. Scientists from the University of Edinburgh have discovered that crucial gene expression changes — called Transcriptome Trajectory Turning Points — occur at similar ages in mice and humans, marking gene regulation events that occur throughout life. A major “lifespan landmark” where the largest number of changes occur in humans is at 26 years old, and in mice it is 5 months old. Females experience a delayed peak regulatory event. The sequence of gene expression changes and mutations, which can tumble periods of critical neuronal synaptic cellular maturation, have been associated with early adult onset of certain neurological disorders, including schizophrenia.
Researchers have investigated the effect of particle size on the differentiation of T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, which play a key role in the production of high affinity antibodies by B cells. They used defined antigen particles to selectively induce Tfh cells and antibody responses, and found that increased duration of antigen presentation and subsequent T cell/dendritic cell (DC) interactions are associated with Tfh induction. Using polystyrene nanoparticles as adjuvants was shown to selectively induce Tfh responses, revealing a potential approach for vaccine design and pathogen control. Furthermore, the sustained presentation of antigen by dendritic cells was found to be important in Tfh differentiation. Larger particles were found to induce Tfh differentiation through the sustained antigen presentation by DCs.
Researchers have discovered that protist Capsaspora owczarzaki, a close relative of multicellular animals, has a highly regulated stage of aggregation that is “associated with significant upregulation of orthologs of genes known to establish multicellularity and tissue architecture in metazoans”. The research also suggests that the presence of multicellularity in some eukaryotic clades arose “…within several eukaryotic clades including the dictyostelids (Amoebozoa), acrasid amoebas (Heterolobosea, Discicristata, Discoba), Guttulinopsis vulgaris (Cercozoa, Rhizaria), the genus Sorogena (Ciliata, Alveolata), the holomycota Fonticula alba (Opisthokonta) and the genus Sorodiplophrys (Labyrinthulomycetes, Heterokonta)”.
Researchers have developed a deep learning-based software, called KymoButler, which automatically tracks dynamic processes in kymographs, graphical representations of spatial position over time. The software performs as well as expert manual data analysis on kymographs, which may exhibit low signal-to-noise ratios, and represents another step towards the widespread adaptation of machine learning techniques in biological data analysis. Kymographs are often used in biology to visualise the motion of fluorescent particles, molecules, vesicles, or organelles moving along a predictable path. Although tracks of individual particles are qualitatively easily distinguished, their automated quantitative analysis is much more challenging.
Researchers have discovered that stomatopod crustaceans, or mantis shrimps, possess insect-like mushroom bodies in their brain, which are centers for learning and memory. These centers have been identified in other arthropods, such as insects and myriapods, but not previously in crustaceans. The discovery of these centers sheds new light on the evolution of arthropod brains and their ability to engage in complex behaviors such as spatial memory, visual recognition, and predation. However, the researchers caution that further research is needed to determine whether the presence of mushroom bodies in stomatopods is a result of convergent evolution or represents the cerebral morphology of a common ancestor of Pancrustacea.
A hot-spot mutation in the RXRA gene is responsible for driving 20-25% of human bladder cancers, according to research. RXRA works with 14 other nuclear receptors, including the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), to regulate transcription. The study found that mutant RXRA induces enhancer/promoter activity in the context of RXRA/PPAR heterodimers in human bladder cancer cells. It shows that RXRAS427F hyperactivity requires the PPAR AF2 domain and deregulation of the PPAR pathway. The research also identifies nuclear receptors as potential therapeutic targets for bladder cancer.
Endocannabinoids (eCBs), which are known for their ability to depress synaptic transmission, have also been discovered to mediate potentiation of the synapse. However, it was not previously clear how eCBs could support bidirectionality. This study combined electrophysiology experiments with mathematical modeling to find out how eCB signaling might support bidirectional long-term plasticity of synaptic strength (LTD and LTP), which underlies multiple forms of learning and memory. The researchers demonstrated that the outcome of spike-timing dependent plasticity (STDP) at corticostriatal synapses is controlled by eCB levels and dynamics. Prolonged and moderate levels of eCB lead to eCB-mediated LTD, while short and large eCB transients produce eCB-mediated LTP. The researchers also found that eCB-tLTD required active calcineurin and eCB-tLTP required the activity of presynaptic PKA. Therefore, eCBs can encode learning and memory bidirectionally, just like glutamate or GABA.
The article describes a method for identifying residue-residue contacts from primary sequence and how this can be used to guide protein structure prediction. The authors describe an experimental method called "saturation-suppressor mutagenesis" using Escherichia coli CcdB as a test case to acquire residue contact information. They identify spatially proximal residues by doing an exhaustive search for suppressor mutations for a given inactive mutant. The residue proximity information is then used to generate spatial constraints that can be used for protein structure prediction. The authors also identify suppressors for buried inactive, non-active site residues of CcdB and experimentally identify suppressors for inactive mutants of the integral membrane protein diacylglycerol kinase A. The methodology is applicable to any macromolecular system for which a convenient phenotypic assay exists.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) serve as a surveillance system to repress the expression of mRNA with nonsense mutations that may produce harmful truncated proteins. They reduce the concentration of their target mRNAs by accelerating expedited poly(A) removal and downstream decay. This reduces the risk of genetic mutations. The authors propose that miRNAs may serve as a novel component of the cellular mRNA quality control system that eliminates nonsense mRNAs. Their study showed that miRNA-mediated surveillance and exon-exon junction complex (EJC)-mediated NMD are not mutually exclusive and act additively to enhance the repressive activity. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is the concept of nonsense mutations being immune to EJC-NMD, and other EJC-independent NMD mechanisms, such as long 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) are involved in the degradation of PTC-containing mRNAs.
Scientists have developed a set of photoswitchable GluN subunits, called LiGluNs, which can regulate the function of specific NMDA receptors. The GluN subunits consist of several subtypes with distinct subunit compositions and functional properties, and are important for regulating synaptic strength and for learning and memory. By changing the length of the MAG molecule, which is used to covalently link the photo-isomerizable Azobenzene to a glutamate ligand, the glutamate moiety of MAG can be designed to either engage or obstruct the ligand binding pocket in the cis configuration, and withdraw from the ligand binding pocket in the trans configuration, yielding light-dependent gating. LiGluNs should help scientists to better understand the role of specific NMDA receptors in synaptic transmission, integration, and plasticity.
The distribution of mRNAs within a cell is important for eukaryotic cell function, but how many of these mRNAs are regulated is still unknown. By using transcriptomics and imaging, researchers studied the subcellular distribution of 5862 mRNAs during Drosophila oogenesis to understand how mRNAs are distributed in cells. They found that mRNA localization is widespread in the ovary and detectable in all of its cell types. Furthermore, this genome-wide image-based resource enabled the researchers to transition from understanding singular mRNA localization events to understanding global regulation of how transcribed mRNAs distribute in cells.
Researchers have developed a machine learning tool, called Sequential Neural Posterior Estimation (SNPE), which can perform Bayesian inference on mechanistic models in neuroscience without requiring access to likelihoods. SNPE can identify all mechanistic model parameters consistent with observed experimental data or selected data features. It uses simulations instead of likelihood calculations to train artificial neural networks to identify admissible parameters, and decouples the design of the model and design of the inference approach for maximum flexibility. The tool is scalable in parameters and data features and can rapidly analyze new data after initial training. SNPE has been tested on receptive fields, ion channels, and Hodgkin-Huxley models and can close the gap between data-driven and theory-driven models of neural dynamics.
The U.S. National Institutes of Health now requires researchers to consider sex as a biological variable in preclinical studies, but some researchers lack training in how to test and report sex differences. A study analyzed recently published articles and found that although sex differences were claimed in the majority of articles analyzed, statistical evidence supporting those differences was often missing. The study also found practices that could mask sex differences, such as pooling the sexes without first testing for a difference. The authors suggest continuing efforts to train researchers in how to test for and report sex differences to improve rigor and reproducibility in biomedical research.
The regulation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), which controls the degradation of short-lived proteins in eukaryotic cells, is critical for maintaining cellular proteostasis.  This study found that USP14, a major deubiquitinating enzyme that regulates the UPS, is a substrate of Akt, a protein kinase that mediates intracellular signaling for growth factors. The phosphorylation of USP14 by Akt at Ser432, which normally blocks its catalytic site, activates its deubiquitinating activity, which in turn regulates proteasome activity and global protein degradation via the UPS. The study suggests that Akt-mediated phosphorylation of USP14 may provide a common mechanism for growth factors to control global proteostasis and promote tumorigenesis in PTEN-negative cancer cells.
Achiasma, a condition in which optic nerve fibers do not cross over to the opposite hemisphere of the brain, results in overlapping cortical representations of the left and right visual hemifields in humans. Two populations of neurons each with a receptive field serving only one hemifield have been identified to explain this overlap in V1-V3 areas. The two populations share control of local vasculature, making it possible to use this system to quantify the relationship between neural and fMRI BOLD responses without direct measurement of neural activity. A power function with an exponent close to 0.5 has been identified as the function that infers the relationship between the BOLD signal and neural response using non-invasive measurements. This approach establishes a direct relationship between the BOLD response and the stimulus condition and is broadly applied in human neuroscience.
Researchers have discovered that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) produced by the mammalian imprinted Dlk1-Dio3 locus, including Meg3, play an important role in maintaining postmitotic motor neuron (MN) cell fate and shaping MN subtype identity by regulating Hox genes expression. Investigations indicate that while protein-centric studies have been used to study cell-type specification during embryonic development for decades, it has now come to light that ncRNAs account for at least 50-80% of transcriptomes. Mechansimatically, Meg3 and other Dlk1-Dio3 locus-derived lncRNAs facilitate Ezh2/Jarid2 interactions. Research demonstrated that these interactions are functionally important and have specific regulatory targets to guide development or induce disease in vivo.
To understand the neural circuits that transform sensory input into motor output, a quantitative framework for describing behavioral dynamics is necessary. This study built a high-throughput optogenetic system for Drosophila larva to quantify sensorimotor transformations underlying navigational behavior. Using a quantitative framework, this study was able to characterize the navigation strategy of the larvae by identifying mathematical functions that represent the stimulus dependence of transition rates. Through this analysis, attractive and repulsive responses were found to coincide with the likelihood of optogenetic activation. The study shows that linear-nonlinear models can accurately predict navigational decision-making for different optogenetic activation waveforms, and that these models can be used to characterize circuits for sensorimotor processing and to establish the valence and dynamics of navigation.
Researchers have discovered a key step in the cell cycle, which regulates when different parts of the genome get activated to replicate DNA and divide. During M phase, Endosulfine (Endos) family proteins are phosphorylated by Greatwall kinase (Gwl), and the resultant pEndos inhibits the phosphatase PP2A-B55, which reverses many CDK-driven phosphorylations. As a result, PP2A-B55 activity must be downregulated when cells go into M phase. The Gwl->pEndos ⊣ PP2A-B55 pathway is critical for M phase entry and maintenance in frog egg extracts, starfish oocytes, and in many cell types in culture or within metazoan organisms. Researchers show here that PP2A-B55 is the enzyme responsible for dephosphorylating pEndos during M phase exit.
Researchers previously generated populations of Escherichia coli exhibiting extreme resistance to ionizing radiation (IR) using directed evolution in the laboratory. The molecular basis of this phenotype was explored, and functional experiments showed that the extreme IR resistance was almost entirely due to just three nucleotide changes in the DNA metabolism genes recA, dnaB, and yfjK. Whilst multiple contributions to IR resistance were identified, the results highlighted a particular adaptation mechanism, involving pre-existing DNA repair functions, that had not been adequately considered in previous studies. The study of organisms with extreme resistance to IR has received increasing attention as a potential source of mechanistic insights that could lead to breakthroughs in biomedical science.
Researchers have developed a new method to precisely manipulate genes in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and primary human T cells. The method combines ribonucleoprotein (RNPs) delivered by the CRISPR/Cas9 system and rAAV6 donor delivery to enable multiplex homologous recombination (HR), which allows precise engineering of complex genotypes that can be easily tracked in a mixed population of cells. The use of reporter genes also allows FACS-purification and tracking of cells that have had multiple alleles or loci modified by HR. The method has broad applications for studying human hematopoietic gene function and networks and for creating innovative engineered stem cell-based therapeutics.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by diminished Survival of Motor Neuron (SMN) protein that leads to neuromuscular junction dysfunction and spinal motor neuron loss. A recent study reported that reduced SMN function affects the action of a pertinent microRNA and its mRNA target in Motor Neurons. The study investigated the link between SMN, Gemin3, and microRNA function. The researchers found that mel-46, the C. elegans Gemin3 ortholog, is perturbed by SMN-1 loss, impacting miR-2 suppression of the M2 muscarinic receptor ortholog, GAR-2, which caused NMJ defects. In an SMA mouse model, m2R levels were increased, and inhibition of m2R rescued motor neuron process defects. Collectively, these results suggest that decreased SMN leads to defective microRNA function via MEL-46 misregulation, followed by increased m2R expression and neuronal dysfunction in SMA.
The Evolutionarily conserved Fun30/SMARCAD1 remodeller is a critical regulator of resection for DNA double strand break (DSBs). It is essential for the initiation of homologous recombination and nucleolytic processing step during DSB repair. The CDK phosphorylation enables Fun30 to form a complex with the phospho-protein-binding scaffold protein Dpb11 which is required for proper localization of Fun30 and for efficient long-range resection in M phase cells. In the absence of CDK requirement, artificial targeting of Fun30 to DSBs is sufficient to bypass the cell cycle regulation of long-range resection, indicating that chromatin remodelling during resection is underlying DSB repair pathway choice. Fun30 is shown to occupy chromatin in close proximity to the DSB and helps to promote appropriate interaction with DNA repair proteins.
Neurotransmitter release in neurons involves several steps, including membrane fusion and SNARE complex assembly orchestrated by proteins such as Munc18-1, Munc13s and Synaptotagmin-1. However, it is not clear whether Munc13s function upstream or downstream of SNARE assembly, or how the different domains of Munc13s are integrated. Recent experiments show that the C1, C2B and C2C domains of Munc13-1 have functional synergy, which helps to bridge the plasma membrane and vesicle together to facilitate SNARE complex assembly. Additionally, reconstitution data suggest that Munc18-1, Munc13-1, SNAREs, NSF-SNAPs, and Synaptotagmin-1 are critical components in forming a “primed” state, which allows for fast fusion upon Ca2+ influx. The C1-C2B region and the C2C domain of Munc13-1 play important roles in neurotransmitter release, potentially helping to bridge synaptic vesicles to the plasma membrane, promoting docking and priming.
A pilot clinical investigation consisting of a non-randomized study with 57 patients and a randomized controlled study with 20 patients with large HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) tested whether the combination of bicarbonate infusion and transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) was more effective in controlling tumors in comparison to TACE alone. Results showed a significant reduction in viable tumor residues (VTR) in patients treated with TACE and bicarbonate in comparison to those treated with TACE alone, with TACE and bicarbonate yielding a 100% objective response rate (ORR) and an overall survival benefit. Lactic acidosis was also found to protect cancer cells against glucose starvation, which allowed cancer cells to survive for a relatively long time. Overall, the study demonstrated that bicarbonate infusion combined with TACE could offer a potentially effective approach to control large HCC.
Researchers have identified a new genetically induced epiallele in the inbred C57BL/6J mouse strain. The allelic variation occurs in the intracisternal A-particles (IAPs), endogenous retroviruses responsible for most insertional mutations in the mouse. The variant, called Iap5-1solo, lacks DNA methylation and H3K9 trimethylation, meaning that it is unresponsive to maternal dietary methyl supplementation. The researchers found that differential epigenetic modification of the two allelic variants of Iap5-1 is associated with metabolic differences and tissue-specific changes in adjacent gene expression. The study establishes the Iap5-1 locus as a naturally occurring and biologically relevant model to investigate the mechanisms underlying TE repression, inter-individual methylation variability, and TE-induced disruptions to host genome function.
The coordination between slow oscillations (SO) and sleep spindles is important for sleep-dependent memory consolidation, but it is unclear how this coordination develops during brain maturation and whether it indexes the development of memory networks. A longitudinal study was conducted that spanned from childhood to adolescence, and participants underwent polysomnography and a declarative word-pair learning task. Results showed that SO-spindle coupling strength increased during maturation and indicated enhanced memory formation from childhood to adolescence. It was also found that SO and spindle morphology changes considerably throughout development. The study provides evidence that improved coordination between SOs and spindles indexes the development of sleep-dependent memory networks.
Researchers developed a microphone array system to study vocalizations during mouse courtship, and found that both male and female mice vocalize during courtship, particularly during chases. They also observed vocal interactions between all possible male-female pairs in the group, and suggest that a female's participation in vocal interactions may signal their increased receptivity. The researchers developed a method to assign vocal signals to specific mice using mouse position trajectories and the likelihood that a sound was emitted at a particular position in the cage. They tested the accuracy and precision of this system, and found a negative correlation between the Mouse Probability Index (MPI) and the distance between the mouse and the estimated sound source location, indicating that mice closer to the estimated sound source location have higher MPI values.
The natural loss of foot muscles in the bipedal jerboa, Jaculus jaculus, involves cellular mechanisms associated with muscle atrophy rather than cell death. The loss of muscle is associated with developmental tissue remodeling that includes elongation of skeletal elements and digit loss. Despite the frequent occurrence of limb muscle loss in birds, reptiles, and mammals, the developmental mechanisms that lead to the natural absence of adult limb muscle are not well understood. The developmental mechanisms that cause the natural loss of muscle in the jerboa could be a failure of early myoblasts to migrate into and/or differentiate in the distal limb or embryonic muscles forming but not persisting through development to the adult. Using transmission electron micrographs, the researchers identified criteria for three categories of maturation and two categories of degeneration. The study suggests that the rapid and almost complete loss of differentiated myofibers in vivo in the Jerboa foot may occur through a compromised ability to form new myofibers and to add nuclei to growing myofibers.
The article discusses the effects of maternal loss on fitness measures in social mammals, particularly mountain gorillas. Maternal care is important for survival and well-being in young offspring, but its loss can lead to negative consequences, such as decreased fitness and increased social adversity. However, some human and animal populations can overcome these negative effects through care from other group members. The study found no discernible fitness costs to maternal loss in mountain gorillas, suggesting that relationships with other group members, particularly dominant males and those close in age, may strengthen following maternal loss, and buffer against social adversity. The study also discusses the potential for compensatory social behaviors from other kin and non-kin group members in overcoming the negative effects of maternal loss.
A study in mice has found that interferon-λ plays a crucial role in inhibiting the spread of respiratory viruses from infected individuals to others. It discovered that mice lacking functional interferon-λ receptors were unable to restrict virus dissemination. Infected mice without this particular type of interferon receptor shed significantly more infectious viruses via their nostrils and transmitted the virus far more efficiently to other mice compared to their wild-type counterparts.

The document discusses the evolution of learned bird songs in oscine songbirds, with a focus on the interaction between adult song plasticity, repertoire size, and mating systems. The study found that species with adult song plasticity tend to have larger syllable and song repertoires than those with song stability, and that this plasticity is associated with bi-directional transitions between monogamous and polygynous mating systems. The study also found that the length of the song-learning window does not consistently determine repertoire sizes, and that sexual selection may indirectly influence open- versus closed-ended learning. Finally, the study examined the rate of evolution for different song characteristics and found that some characteristics evolved faster in song-plastic lineages.
The study investigated the relationship between Nuclear Factor kappa B (NF-κB) signalling and the cell cycle, and how they are controlled differently depending on the timing of an inflammatory signal. Using experimental and computational analyses on HeLa cervical cancer and SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells, the study discovered physical and functional interactions between NF-κB and the E2 Factor 1 (E2F-1) and E2 Factor 4 (E2F-4) cell cycle regulators that modulated the NF-κB response. The study found that the dynamics of RelA nuclear translational activation were affected by the stage of cell cycle. In S-phase, the NF-κB response was delayed or repressed, while cell cycle progression was unimpeded, whereas activation of NF-κB at the G1/S boundary resulted in a longer cell cycle and more synchronous initial NF-κB responses among cells. The data identify new mechanisms by which the cellular response to stress is differentially controlled at different stages of the cell cycle.
The article discusses the role of C-terminal Binding Protein (CtBP) in stabilizing cell fates during regeneration and damage to tissue. The study conducted a genetic screen to identify genes that negatively regulate cell fate changes, and found that mutations in CtBP lead to increased frequency of ectopic wings in fruit flies. The study also investigated the early stages of ectopic pouch formation and found that wingless (Wg) and Dilp8 play a key role in triggering the formation of ectopic wings, while JNK signaling is also critical in this process. The findings suggest that CtBP opposes the destabilizing effects of JNK and JAK/STAT pathways, and that other signaling pathways are critical for triggering ectopic wings at specific points in development.
The transcription and export (TREX) complex is essential for the export of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. It selectively binds mRNA maturation marks and loads the export factor NXF1-NXT1 to license mRNA for nuclear export. The complex comprises the multi-subunit THO complex, the DEXD-box RNA helicase UAP56/DDX39B and an RNA export adapter such as ALYREF. This study presents the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the human THO-UAP56/DDX39B complex and reveals that the THO-UAP56 complex multimerises into a 28-subunit tetrameric assembly, suggesting that the selective recognition of mature mRNA is facilitated by the simultaneous sensing of multiple, spatially distant mRNA regions and maturation marks. The study also provides insight into ALYREF function within the TREX complex bound to mRNA.
The study investigated the thorax morphology of ant queens and workers and found that workers have unique skeletomuscular modifications that increase power and flexibility of head-thorax articulation. The study also identified two distinct types of queens with repeated evolutionary associations with colony foundation strategies. The research suggests that ants invest in the relative size of thorax segments according to their tasks, and this versatility of head movements allows for better manipulation of food and objects, contributing to the ants’ ecological and evolutionary success. The study emphasizes the importance of a detailed understanding of morphology in elucidating how organisms evolve and operate in nature.
Arterial occlusion can lead to serious tissue damage and ischemia, but the presence of native collateral arteries can restore circulation and limit tissue damage. The mixed-lineage protein kinase (MLK)-cJun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway is crucial for the formation of these collateral arteries, and disruption of the pathway can cause severe blood flow blockade and failure to recover. The JNK pathway is required for proper vascular morphogenesis and collateral artery patterning, and disruption of the pathway leads to excessive sprouting angiogenesis and decreased Dll4/Notch signaling. While the collateral circulation is crucially important for the protective response to arterial occlusive diseases, little is known about the cellular and morphogenetic processes, or the molecular factors and mechanisms, that contribute to native collateral artery formation. Studies of leptomenengial (or pial) collateral arteries in the brain have provided significant insight.
The male courtship behavior of Drosophila is controlled by the male-specific products of the fruitless gene (fruM) and its expressing neuronal circuitry. Researchers found that while fruM is required during a critical developmental period for innate courtship toward females, its function during adulthood is involved in inhibiting male-male courtship. By altering or eliminating fruM expression, researchers were able to generate males that are innately heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or without innate courtship but could acquire such behavior in an experience-dependent manner. These findings show that fruM is critical during development to build a sex circuitry with reduced flexibility and enhanced efficiency and provide a new view about how fruM tunes functional flexibility of a sex circuitry instead of switching on its function.
The study investigates the replicability of the previously-reported 'structural brain behavior' (SBB)-associations and explores the potential causes and consequences of the findings. The results reveal that the associations between psychological measures and brain morphology, although supported by evidence, have underestimated effect sizes and are challenging to replicate in an independent sample. The study highlights the need to consider factors such as sample size and flexible analysis choices when investigating the correlating brain characteristics of psychological phenotype. The study also demonstrates that publishing null findings reports can contribute to a more accurate and balanced apprehension of brain-behavior relationships and psychological interindividual differences.
The gene Sam68 is an important early regulator in genotoxic stress-initiated nuclear signaling pathways leading to the activation of the transcription factor, NF-κB. Sam68 is involved in stimulating the production of polymers of ADP-ribose (PAR) in response to DNA damage, which activate NF-κB and promote the expression of anti-apoptotic genes. Sam68 is also involved in the development and survival of colon cancer, and its expression correlates with poor prognosis. Sam68-deficiency leads to decreased genotoxic stress-induced activation of NF-κB, and ultimately hypersensitivity to DNA damaging agents or radiation. Downregulation of Sam68 sensitizes human colorectal cancer cells to spontaneous and genotoxic stress-induced cell death and retards colon tumor growth and survival, particularly in genetically susceptible mice. The results suggest that Sam68 could execute an essential function in the nuclear-initiated NF-κB signaling pathway.
The document discusses the use of single-cell RNA-sequencing to understand the transcriptional variation in unicellular malaria parasites, which is associated with key phenotypes such as red blood cell invasion and immune evasion. The protocol was adapted to deconvolute transcriptional variation for more than 500 individual parasites of both rodent and human malaria, comprising asexual and sexual life-cycle stages. The study found previously hidden discrete transcriptional signatures during the pathogenic part of the life cycle, suggesting that expression over development is not as continuous as commonly thought. In transmission stages, the study found novel, sex-specific roles for differential expression of contingency gene families that are usually associated with immune evasion and pathogenesis. Finally, the document discusses the reliability of the protocol and the classification of each cell, as well as the potential use of scRNA-seq in other difficult-to-obtain organisms.
The document discusses the heritability of lung function measures and how genetics can be used to suggest drug-repurposing candidates that could improve respiratory outcomes. The study found genetic correlations between lung function measures and seven druggable biochemical traits, and evidence of a causal relationship between increased fasting glucose and diminished lung function. The researchers developed polygenic scores for lung function within pathways with known drug targets and investigated their relationship with pulmonary phenotypes and gene expression in independent cohorts to prioritize individuals who may benefit from particular drug repurposing opportunities. A transcriptome-wide association study of lung function identified several drug-gene interactions with predicted lung function increasing modes of action, including drugs that regulate blood glucose. The study provides genetic justification for a number of novel drug-repurposing opportunities that could improve lung function, which is vital for the ongoing maintenance of homeostasis.
The study examines the Vegf-Dll4/Notch feedback system in the formation and maintenance of blood vessels. The authors show that high levels of Vegf cause endothelial cells to synchronise their behaviour through Dll4 expression, leading to vessel expansion but disrupting branching. The study uses both in vitro and in vivo experimentation and suggests that the synchronisation of Dll4 oscillations determines whether new vessels branch or expand. The study also shows the difficulties in analysing Vegf and Dll4/Notch signalling quantitatively and dynamically, especially in vivo.
The Musashi (Msi) family of RNA binding proteins are expressed in stem/progenitor and cancer cells and are associated with epithelial-luminal cell state regulation. They rarely mutate but frequently overexpress in human cancers. The proteins of this family regulate translation of genes implicated in epithelial cell biology and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and promote an epithelial splicing pattern. Overexpression of Msi proteins inhibits the translation of Jagged1 that is required for EMT and repressed EMT in cell culture and mammary gland in vivo. Knockdown of Msis in epithelial cancer cells promoted loss of epithelial identity. These proteins mark the epithelial stem cell state across distinct tissues. Msi expression correlations with HER2 expression in breast cancer cell lines, and knockdown of Msi proteins resulted in decreased proliferation. They function as regulators of cell state, with potential relevance to cancer. Msi2 is highly expressed in Luminal B breast cancer tumors.
During tumor progression, cancer cells must adapt to environments that lack proper extracellular matrix attachment. A gain of function screen revealed the cell adhesion molecule PVRL4 (also known as Nectin-4), promoting anchorage-independence in cells by driving cell-to-cell attachment and integrin β4/SHP-2/c-Src activation. PVRL4 is critical for transformation of breast cancer cells and blocking PVRL4-driven cell-to-cell attachment with monoclonal antibodies inhibits the growth of orthotopically implanted tumors. Targeted therapies against these cell-to-cell contacts could provide a novel cancer treatment approach. A genetic screen for drivers of anchorage-independent growth identified PVRL4, which potently induced anchorage-independent colony formation. PVRL4's ability to promote such colony formation was facilitated by the extracellular part of the protein and not by its intracellular region. PVRL4 was seen to promote rapid association of cells into multicellular clusters in suspension, and PVRL4-induced colonies are clonal in origin.
The study focuses on understanding the mechanisms controlling programmed grooming in Drosophila melanogaster. The researchers developed a high-throughput platform that uses a k-nearest neighbors algorithm to classify fly behavior and detect grooming events with over 90% accuracy. The data showed that flies spend around 13% of their waking time grooming, which is largely controlled by two major internal programs. One program regulates the timing of grooming and involves the core circadian clock components cycle, clock, and period. The second program regulates the duration of grooming and appears to be independent of period. The researchers suggest that the dual control model of timing and duration resembles the two-process regulatory model of sleep. The study also discusses the importance of grooming in animal behavior, including maintaining clean body surfaces and its role in diverse functions such as thermoregulation, communication, and social relationships. The researchers aim to further dissect the mechanisms controlling long-term grooming in Drosophila using their quantitative approach. They developed an automated video image analysis package that classifies fly behavior into grooming, locomotion, or rest, to efficiently and rapidly interpret grooming events in the recordings without incurring any significant errors in reporting locomotion and rest.
The respiratory chemoreflex is a critical mechanism that maintains constant levels of CO2 and H+ in arterial blood, and its circuitry in mammals is still elusive. The retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN), a collection of neurons in the ventral medullary surface, has been proposed as a candidate element of this circuitry. Using intersectional genetic strategies, researchers lesioned RTN neurons defined by Atoh1 and Phox2b expression and found that they are a necessary component of the chemoreflex circuitry. They also found that Atoh1 is essential for the formation of a functional RTN and for CO2 chemical drive to breathe before and at birth.
The article discusses the nature of nucleoli, membraneless organelles responsible for ribosomal biogenesis in eukaryotic cells, and their interactions with the surrounding nucleoplasm. The authors found that the nucleoli exhibit liquid-like behavior and are susceptible to changes in chromatin transcription and packing. The authors studied the motion of human nucleoli in vivo and revealed two types of nucleolar pair dynamics: an unexpected correlated motion prior to coalescence and an independent motion otherwise. The nucleolar volume distribution was found to be consistent with a power law function unaccounted for by any current theory. The authors also investigated the physical properties of the nucleolar subcompartments, specifically the granular and dense fibrillar components, and their contribution to the nucleoli's liquid-like properties. They found that the dense fibrillar components were close to spherical and did not fuse themselves upon nucleolar coalescence. Finally, targeted biochemical perturbations were employed to probe the contribution of specific cellular processes, such as cytoskeletal forces, transcriptional activity, and protein synthesis, to maintaining the nucleoli-nucleoplasm interface.
The enzyme Topoisomerase II relieves stress in DNA by introducing double-strand breaks (DSBs) via a transient, covalently linked Topoisomerase II DNA-protein intermediate, termed TOP2 cleavage complex (TOP2cc). TOP2 poisons, such as the chemotherapeutic agent Etoposide (ETO), have shown significant variability in their therapeutic effectiveness across different cancers for unknown reasons. It has been suggested that a robust DNA damage response (DDR) is elicited only after ETO-trapped TOP2ccs have been converted to 'clean' protein-free DSB ends. This suggests that a DSB shielded by a covalently bound protein can evade detection. It has also been reported that proteasome-mediated repair of TOP2cc is highly error-prone. By inhibiting proteasome-mediated degradation of TOP2cc either through chemical inhibition or by ablation of RNF4-mediated ubiquitination of TOP2cc, an intact and enzymatically competent TOP2 was able to reseal the protein-linked DSBs without invoking a significant DDR, thus preventing genomic instability and ultimately leading to enhanced cell survival after treatment with topoisomerase poisons.
A recent study investigated the interaction between lip movements and rhythmic brain activity in speech processing. The study found that lip movements during continuous speech facilitate speech processing and show temporal modulations at the syllabic rate. Lip movements support the disambiguation of syllables and provide temporal onset cues for upcoming words or syllables. The study, which used magnetoencephalography (MEG), demonstrated significant entrainment in the visual cortex and synchronization between different attention conditions. The results emphasize the importance of visually entrained and attention-modulated rhythmic brain activity for the enhancement of audiovisual speech processing.  Overall, lip movements contain sufficient information to allow trained observers to comprehend speech through visual signals.
The article discusses research into the regulatory aspects of the snake HoxD locus and its evolution in relation to the snake’s lack of limbs and elongated body plan. The study found that snake mesoderm-specific enhancers are mostly located within the HoxD cluster itself, unlike in other vertebrates where they are located outside the cluster. The bimodal HoxD chromatin structure is maintained in snakes despite the absence of limbs. However, regulation of the snake Hoxd genes during the development of external genitalia is different from other vertebrates. The study used an interspecies comparative approach to investigate these regulatory aspects and identified possible causes for changes in snake Hox gene regulation.
Rodents have conical whiskers which are adaptive for tactile exploration in constrained environments and for feature extraction during active haptic exploration of objects and surfaces. The conical whisker shape is critical for the active haptic exploration of objects, as it allows rodents to maneuver their sensors past objects with relative ease. Whiskers of different animals have different shapes which likely reflect the differences in how animals use their whiskers. For example, the undulating microstructure of harbor seal whiskers suppresses vibrations triggered by vortices and enhances the seal's ability to analyze water movements.
The article discusses the mechanisms of autoregulation of DNA transposons and the importance of control mechanisms in the short to medium-term after an active transposon first arrives in a genome. The article focuses on the Hsmar1 transposon and its autoregulation mechanism during assembly of the transpososome, which arises from the multimeric state of the transposase, mediated by competition for binding sites. The article explores the dynamics of a genomic invasion using computer models supported by in vitro and in vivo experiments and shows that amplification accelerates at first but then achieves a constant rate. The rate is proportional to the genome size and inversely proportional to transposase expression and its affinity for the transposon ends. The article also discusses different models of transpososome assembly, including synapsis-by-protein-dimerization (S-PD) and synapsis-by-naked-end-capture (S-NEC). In conclusion, the article suggests that the mechanism of autoregulation based on a biochemical analysis of Hsmar1 transposition may be widely applicable and resistant to selfish exploitation.
Autophagy is a process by which cells clear harmful material from the cytoplasm, using autophagosomes to deliver cytoplasmic cargo for lysosomal degradation. Selective autophagy is mediated by cargo receptors that bind to the cargo and the isolation membrane. In humans, p62/SQSTM-1 is a major cargo receptor that recognizes the cargo material due to its modification with ubiquitin. During autophagy, p62 uses oligomerization to stabilize its interaction with LC3B and linear ubiquitin. The authors show that p62 oligomerization generates high-avidity interactions with these binding partners and allows p62 to simultaneously select for the isolation membrane and the ubiquitinated cargo. This feature is conserved in p62 mammals, as shown by their lack of multiple low-affinity-binding sites for ATG8 family proteins such as LC3B and GABARAP. Deletion of the p62 PB1 domain, which mediates oligomerization, inhibits the recruitment of p62 to the autophagosome formation site.
Neurotransmitter:Sodium Symporters (NSSs) are proteins that clear neurotransmitters such as dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine from the synaptic cleft, and are involved in the regulation of synaptic transmission in the central nervous system. LeuT, an amino acid transporter from Aquifex aeolicus, has been extensively studied to understand the structure-function relationships of NSSs. However, the substrate binding stoichiometry and principal transport mechanism of LeuT have been heavily debated. To gain insight into the number of binding sites in LeuT, researchers used solid state NMR to specifically characterize the bound leucine ligand. They were able to produce high-quality NMR spectra of substrate bound to microcrystalline LeuT samples and identify one set of sodium-dependent substrate-specific chemical shifts, leading them to conclude that there is only one detectable leucine molecule bound to LeuT.
The process of cytokinesis, the division of cells, requires the activation of the GTPase RhoA. The exchange factor responsible for RhoA activation is ECT-2, which is regulated to ensure the correct assembly of the contractile ring required for cytokinesis. The centralspindlin complex activates ECT-2, but its mechanism is not fully understood. Researchers found that ECT-2-mediated RhoA activation relies on the ability of CYK-4, a subunit of the centralspindlin complex, to bind RhoA and promote its hydrolysis. CYK-4 RhoGAP activity promotes RhoA activation by contributing to GEF activation. The researchers propose that the cytokinetic RhoGEF involves complex formation between ECT-2, centralspindlin, and RhoA. Further experiments showed that CYK-4-dependent membrane binding promotes furrow ingression, and the C1 domain is required for membrane localization. CYK-4E448K substitution impairs membrane localization and is likely to affect the function of both its GAP and C1 domains. The ability of ced-10/Rac1 to rescue cytokinesis in CYK-4E448K embryos requires the NOP-1 pathway for furrow ingression.
New research has identified a functioning alternative mevalonate (MVA) pathway in bacteria for the first time. The MVA pathway is necessary to produce the building
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) signal through allostery and chemically distinct agonists can produce different receptor-based effects, introducing allosteric ‘bias’ into the signaling system. However, the hypothesis that different agonists drive GPCRs to engage different cytoplasmic proteins in living cells remains untested due to the complexity of readouts through which receptor-proximal interactions are typically inferred. To address this, researchers have developed a cell-based assay based on GPCR-interacting biosensors that are disconnected from endogenous transduction mechanisms. Using this assay, the researchers demonstrate differences between biosensor recruitment produced by chemically distinct opioid ligands in living cells, and show that selective recruitment applies to GRK2, a biologically relevant GPCR regulator, through discrete interactions of GRK2 with receptors or with G protein beta-gamma subunits which are differentially promoted by agonists. These findings suggest that the experimental strategy can also detect differential protein recruitment by other GPCRs.
The refractive index (RI) mismatches between live specimens and media can limit the depth and image quality in live-imaged primary cell cultures, zebrafish, planarians, and human cerebral organoids. Fixing the samples with optical clearing techniques is the current solution, but is not applicable for live specimens. Iodixanol is presented as a non-toxic medium supplement that can match the RI of live specimens, creating substantial improvements in image quality. The compound can dial in the refractive index of solutions and works well with agarose embedding protocols, emitting low autofluorescence. Iodixanol allowed improved lateral and axial image resolution while being innocuous to human HeLa cell cultures, zebrafish embryos, and Dendrocoelum lacteum amputation fragments.
A study conducted on Caenorhabditis males has discovered that male pheromone-dependent male death is unique to androdioecious Caenorhabditis and may be to reduce the number of males in hermaphroditic populations. Additionally, germline and neurons play key roles in male pheromone-dependent male death. Meanwhile, mating-induced death is germline dependent and belongs to another molecular pathway. Across species, the conservation of lifespan and population structure is revealed through the study of sex and species-specific regulation of aging. Caenorhabditis species served as a means to evaluate male lifespan regulation from an evolutionary perspective, and the study discovered that male-specific population density-dependent death in C. elegans is due to the perception of male pheromone as a toxin. Grouping male Caenorhabditis males decreases lifespan, while the lifespan of hermaphrodites is not affected by population density. Moreover, Caenorhabditis female pheromones attract males while the hermaphrodites modify their pheromone profiles depending on their sperm status. The male ascaroside pheromones can help the reproductive system and delay the loss of hermaphrodite germline stem cells.
Liver fluke infection with Opisthorchis viverrini is the main risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma, a type of bile duct cancer prevalent in Southeast Asia. Researchers used CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to remove the gene encoding the liver fluke granulin (Ov-GRN-1) from the liver fluke genome. This resulted in the depletion of Ov-GRN-1 transcripts and protein, and reduced pathological biliary hyperplasia and fibrosis in hamsters. This study deepens the understanding of how liver flukes cause disease, and could help in the development of new treatments for cholangiocarcinoma.
The role of chromatin in regulating DNA replication initiation in eukaryotic organisms has been studied using reconstituted nucleosomal DNA replication assays. Different chromatin-remodeling enzymes were used to remodel nucleosomes on origin-DNA templates and the impact of nucleosomes on replication initiation was assessed. Results showed that nucleosomal organization had an impact on two steps of replication initiation: origin licensing and helicase activation. Local nucleosome positioning enhanced origin specificity and modulated helicase loading by influencing ORC DNA binding. The studies show that nucleosomes directly modulate origin licensing and activation and provide insights into the regulation of replication initiation by chromatin.
The process of neuronal subtype generation involves the specification of neural progenitors followed by postmitotic neuronal differentiation. In this study, researchers have identified a mechanism in which the neurotrophic factor NGF and the transcription factor Runx1 coordinate the maturation of nonpeptidergic nociceptors, a major subtype of neurons involved in detecting noxious and pruritogenic stimuli. They show that NGF signaling promotes the expression of Cbfb, a non-DNA binding cofactor, which is necessary
A new study shows that the hippocampus, a brain region important for learning and memory, may coordinate memory recall by transiently perturbing the balance between excitation and inhibition in the neocortex, releasing memories stored across distributed neural circuits. The research, conducted on humans, showed that associative memory recall of a visual cue was accompanied by a transient increase in the ratio between glutamate and GABA in visual cortex, predicted by activity in the hippocampus. The study suggests that the hippocampus provides a ‘memory index’ for information stored across distributed cortical circuits.
The FLT3ITD mutation is more common in adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and much rarer in childhood and infancy AML. The mutation depletes adult hematopoietic stem cells but not fetal/neonatal ones, which seems to be due to developmental context and gene expression. The FLT3ITD mutation hyperactivates the MAPK pathway only in postnatal stages of development. Fetal and neonatal progenitors are less competent for transformation since they do not express the FLT3ITD target genes; this is likely the reason why the risk of developing AML with FLT3ITD mutation is higher in adults than in children. FLT3 is more highly expressed in adult HPCs than in HSCs but its expression does not change with age. A limiting dilution transplantation assay shows that fetal Flt3ITD/ITD HSCs are functional, but they lose repopulating activity after transplantation into adult recipient mice. The mutation causes HSC depletion, HPC/GMP expansion, and myeloproliferative neoplasms beginning at or shortly after birth. Overall, this work shows a crucial role for developmental context in the pathogenesis of FLT3ITD-driven AML.
The study investigates the role of cell cycle regulator p16 in intervertebral disc degeneration (IVDD) and its potential as a preventative measure for IVDD. The study found a positive correlation between p16 expression levels and the severity of IVDD in human and mouse models. Deletion of p16 was found to attenuate IVDD by promoting cell cycle and inhibiting cell senescence and oxidative stress. The study also explored the potential mechanisms by which p16 functions in IVDD, including its mediation of oxidative stress and promotion of proliferation by accelerating the movement of cells through the G1/S checkpoint. The study suggests that p16 deletion plays a protective role in preventing IVDD by reducing inflammation, increasing antioxidant enzyme gene expression, and decreasing oxidative stress.
This study focuses on how internal states affect the foraging behavior of Drosophila melanogaster to maintain nutritional homeostasis. The researchers used an automated video tracking system to monitor the exploitation and exploration of sugar and yeast patches by flies in different metabolic and reproductive states. The study found that metabolic and reproductive states modulate the flies' decisions to stop at a yeast patch and leave it. The internal nutrient state dictates the exploration-exploitation trade-off. Nutrient-deprived flies focus on specific patches while satiated flies explore more globally. The study provides insights into the mechanisms underlying protein homeostasis as well as how internal states change behavioral strategies in animals to mediate value-based decisions on nutrient selection.
Researchers have discovered that a protein called thioredoxin-interacting protein (Txnip), which regulates glucose levels, also plays a role in the absorption of fructose by the small intestine. Metabolic studies have suggested that the small intestine's ability to absorb fructose is limited, but this research has discovered that deletion of Txnip reduced the uptake of fructose into the peripheral bloodstream and the liver in mice. The study also revealed that the expression of Txnip was enhanced in diabetic mice, increasing fructose uptake, leading researchers to conclude that a diabetic state can promote the absorption of the sugar. Since dietary consumption of fructose has increased in modernised societies, researchers suggest that their results could help explain the increase in metabolic diseases, including obesity and type 2 diabetes, which has occurred in recent years.
Researchers have identified the neural pathways responsible for aversive learning in nematode worms, according to a report in the journal eLife. Scientists found that silencing specific neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans with the gene gcy-28d eliminated aversive learning. This and other tests revealed that AIA interneurons are key to transfer the sense of food deprivation experienced together with certain smells to the AWC olfactory neurons, in order to allow process the repulsion caused by the odor. The finding could improve understanding of the neurological processes of aversion in other animals, including humans.
Researchers have found that the outgrowth of Müller glial lateral processes in the retina is determined by factors independent of neuronal activity. The study used two-photon volumetric imaging to show that during the second postnatal week, Müller glial processes were highly dynamic with rapid extensions and retractions that were mediated by cytoskeletal rearrangements. The research used the mouse retina as a model to explore mechanisms and a possible function of neuron-glia signaling during development. The study found that lateral process motility is facilitated by turnover of actin filaments and microtubules and may be modulated by growth factor signaling. Furthermore, previous studies have demonstrated that retinal waves induce increases in intracellular calcium in Müller glia.
The use of pairwise models to describe many-species communities, where an individual receives fitness effects from pairwise interactions with each species, has been common practice. However, a new study has shown that a single equation fails to capture diverse pairwise microbial interactions, and that different equations are suitable depending on whether an interaction is consumable or reusable, whether it is mediated by one or more mediators, and sometimes even on quantitative details of the community. The results suggest that pairwise modeling will often fail to predict microbial dynamics. Furthermore, universality assumptions made in pairwise models often fail when applied to microbial communities, which employ diverse chemical-mediated interactions.
The Chromatin Assembly Factor 1 (CAF-1) is a histone chaperone that plays a crucial role in the assembly and disassembly of nucleosomes during DNA replication. To understand the mechanism of CAF-1, researchers investigated the protein-protein interactions within the CAF-1-H3/H4 complex which deposits tetrameric (H3/H4)2 histones onto newly-synthesized DNA. The findings indicate that the Cac1 subunit is a scaffold within the CAF-1-H3/H4 complex and is responsible for the major interactions required for H3/H4 binding and tetramerization. Cac1
Researchers have identified a genetic pathway in roundworms that helps them respond to extreme cold temperatures. The pathway is triggered by cold and involves two genes, ISY-1 and ZIP-10. ISY-1 controls the ZIP-10 gene by regulating the microRNA mir-60; ZIP-10 then induces several protease-encoding genes which leads to stress-induced organismic death. The results indicate that the ZIP-10 genetic program mediates the response to cold and promotes wild-population kin selection under resource-limiting and thermal stress conditions. The study also sheds light on how organisms respond to cold shock, which is still not well understood.
Activating mutations in the genes KRAS and EGFR are mutually exclusive in human lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD) and the co-occurrence of the mutations is deleterious, according to a study published in the journal eLife. It is generally assumed that there is no selective pressure to favor cells with both mutations over those with only one, yet recent research notes that mutations in both genes might be expected to offer a selective advantage over a mutation in just one of them. However, mutations in both genes are never or very rare to see, prompting researchers to propose that oncogenic mutation of both genes in the same cell confers an unexpected inhibitory phenotype, such as synthetic lethality, that is selected against during tumour development. The study also suggests that this type of gene interaction may reveal vulnerabilities in lung and other cancers that suggest novel therapeutic strategies.
The physiology underlying the bar-headed goose's migratory flight at extreme altitude has been studied by collecting the first cardiorespiratory measurements of bar-headed geese flying at simulated altitude in a wind tunnel. The metabolic rate during flight increased 16-fold from rest and arterial Po2 was maintained throughout flights. The study aimed to determine how the metabolic challenge of flight differs between normoxia and normobaric hypoxia, and whether bar-headed geese are capable of wind tunnel flight in severe normobaric hypoxia equivalent to altitudes of roughly 9,000 meters. The results showed that flight in hypoxia is largely achieved via a reduction in metabolic rate compared to normoxia, and mixed venous PO2 decreased during the initial portion of flights in hypoxia indicative of increased tissue O2 extraction.
A new class of antiretroviral agents called allosteric HIV-1 integrase (IN) inhibitors (ALLINIs) have been discovered, which disrupt proper viral maturation by inducing hyper-multimerization of IN. The lead pyridine-based ALLINI KF116 selectively targets IN tetramers, crucial for HIV-1 replication, while restricting lower order protein oligomers. KF116 treatment compromises the tight association of IN with capsid cores during subsequent infection of target cells. Furthermore, highly active (-)-KF116 enantiomer exhibits substantially more potency against the clinically relevant dolutegravir resistant mutant virus, suggesting potential clinical benefits for complementing dolutegravir therapy with pyridine-based ALLINIs. Scaffold differences between pyridine and quinoline-based ALLINIs need to be further investigated, and the role of the N-terminal domain (NTD) in inhibitor-induced higher-order IN multimerization remains to be elucidated.
Researchers have discovered a new pathway where engagement between lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) promotes the nuclear localisation of IRAK2 in murine macrophages, which can facilitate the nuclear export of a specific subset of inflammation-related mRNAs for translation. IRAK2 kinase activity is required for LPS-induced RanBP2-mediated IRAK2 sumoylation and nuclear translocation. According to the researchers, taken together, the results suggest that while SRSF1 binding to target mRNAs renders them sensitive for nuclear export, the function of IRAK2 facilitates the removal of SRSF1 and nuclear export machinery to export the inflammatory mRNAs to the cytosol for protein translation.
Ribosomes can sometimes read through stop codons, elongating the nascent peptide rather than terminating it. Stop codon readthrough is essential for many viruses and can also play important regulatory roles in host genes. The importance of regulated readthrough in eukaryotes remains largely unexplored. This document presents a ribosome profiling assay for Drosophila melanogaster, providing the first genome-wide experimental analysis of readthrough. The study finds that readthrough is far more pervasive than expected and provides general mechanisms to regulate gene expression and function, and to add plasticity to the proteome during evolution. The study also demonstrates readthrough occurs in yeast and humans. The assay enables analysis of translation at a genome-wide level with empirical data by examining the physical locations of ribosomes along mRNA. 
A recent study suggests that deep learning can occur in the real brain with the use of segregated dendritic compartments that are similar to those found in neocortical pyramidal neurons. Deep learning is an approach to artificial intelligence that uses neural networks with multiple layers of processing units to generate hierarchical representations. The problem of credit assignment arises in multi-layer networks where early layers impact downstream connections. The study shows that a deep learning algorithm that utilizes multi-compartment neurons can take advantage of multi-layer architectures to categorize images better than a single layer network. The study also shows that the use of segregated dendritic compartments can explain the morphology of neocortical pyramidal neurons. Overall, the study provides a significant breakthrough in understanding how the real brain might do credit assignment.
Researchers have found that repeatedly regenerated lenses of Japanese newts showed a robust transcriptional program comparable to young lenses that had never experienced regeneration. This finding suggests that, despite ageing, the newts' regenerative ability is retained and capable of generating lenses with an undisturbed genetic activity. The newt is a remarkable model for the study of regeneration in relation to ageing because it is among the few vertebrates that can regenerate tissues, organs, and body parts. These unparalleled regenerative traits may provide regenerative medicine with answers it is presently seeking. The study of transcriptomes in lenses, irises, and tails from repeatedly regenerated newts revealed that gene expression signatures of ageing were observed in the tails and irises but not in lenses.
Scientists have identified a potential way to slow down aging and promote longevity in animals, even in old age. The study, conducted on the nematode C. elegans, investigated the effects of reducing insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) late in life using an auxin-inducible degradation (AID) system to deplete the DAF-2/insulin/IGF-1 transmembrane receptor. Results showed that AID-mediated depletion of DAF-2 protein extended lifespan without causing adverse phenotypes. At geriatric ages, AID-mediated DAF-2 depletion resulted in a doubling of lifespan. The study provides a proof-of-concept that even close to the end of an individual's lifespan, therapies can promote longevity without causing unwanted pathologies.
Researchers have determined the function of the conserved protein CelTOS found in apicomplexan parasites, which cause diseases including malaria and babesiosis. The protein is essential for the traversal of cells within mammals and arthropods, but until now its role has been unknown because it lacks similarity to proteins of known function. The study found that CelTOS binds to and disrupts membranes, using pores to achieve nearly universal inner leaflet cellular activity to enable the exit of the parasites from cells during traversal. The findings could inform the design of future therapeutics against these diseases.
Researchers have identified CBP/EP300 bromodomain inhibition, a viable therapeutic strategy to combat lymphoid malignancies dependent on the IRF4 network. Potent CBP/EP300 bromodomain inhibitors like SGC-CBP30 and I-CBP112 selectively target multiple myeloma cell lines by directly suppressing the lymphocyte-specific transcription factor IRF4, essential for the viability of myeloma cells, resulting in concomitant repression of the IRF4 target gene c-MYC. CBP/EP300 bromodomain inhibition has been shown to be effective in arresting myeloma cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, leading to apoptotic death. It has been found that the oncogenic activity of transcription factors like NF-κB, MAF, MYC, and interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) has been implicated in multiple myeloma development. However, any chemical agent that regulates the IRF4 mRNA expression has not been identified.
The internal state of an organism can influence its perception of stimuli and subsequent behavior. In the case of starved flies, there is enhanced sensitivity to attractive odors and reduced sensitivity to aversive odors, which is mediated by neuromodulatory systems that functionally reconfigure early olfactory processing. Short neuropeptide F enhances the olfactory sensitivity of ORNs involved in attraction while tachykinin suppresses activity of ORNs involved in aversion. When foraging and feeding to maintain energy homeostasis, animals must weigh both aversive and attractive sensory inputs, with their perceptions influenced by their own internal state. Sensory systems undergo dramatic functional modifications when animals enter different internal states such as hunger or arousal. Neuromodulators are an important class of molecules involved in this process. The study of hunger and satiety in fruit flies has identified key neuromodulators that serve to communicate an animal's nutritional status to its nervous system and thus, change its behavior. In a single fly food odor search paradigm, it was shown that starvation fine-tunes appetitive behavior and that this is mediated by G-protein coupled receptors that alter excitability in ORNs.
The study explores how cells regulate assembly and disassembly of processing bodies (PBs), which are cellular structures involved in degradation and/or storage of mRNAs. The ATPase activity of Dhh1 is identified as a critical regulator of PB formation. Cells expressing a Dhh1 variant carrying a mutation in the DEAD motif, which disrupts ATP hydrolysis, form constitutive granules with both the behavior and composition of PBs induced during glucose starvation. Using recombinant proteins, the study also shows that Not1 stimulates the ATPase activity of yeast Dhh1, similar to its function in mammals. The results reveal that the ATPase activity of Dhh1 is a critical regulator of PB dynamics.
The Drosophila embryo's epithelial tubes utilize apical F-actin cables, generated by the formin-family protein Diaphanous (Dia), for efficient vectorial secretion. Apical localization and activity of Dia are key to restricting F-actin formation to the correct membrane domain. This study identifies the mechanisms that target Dia to the apical surface in Drosophila tubular epithelia. The article demonstrates that binding of Rho1 and PI (4,5)P2 at the apical membrane are required for efficient apical targeting of Dia. An N-terminal basic domain of Dia is crucial for apical localization, implying direct binding to PI (4,5)P2. These signals ensure the restriction of Dia to the apical membrane, allowing apical secretion to occur in tubular organs.
The study is focused on group 1 CD1 molecules that present lipid antigens from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) to T cells. In order to investigate the role of group 1 CD1-restricted lipid-specific T cells in protective immunity against Mtb, mice that expressed human group 1 CD1 molecules were generated. Using the mice, it was found that these T cells play a protective role during Mtb infection by reducing bacterial burdens in the lung, spleen and liver. The study also discusses the importance of targeting lipid antigens and the feasibility of studying group 1 CD1-restricted T cell responses in aerosol infection with Mtb.
A study, where researchers looked at the interaction partners of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) in embryonic stem (ES) cells, found that AIRE is a spindle-associated protein critical for mitotic fidelity in mouse ES cells. The study suggests new regulatory mechanisms for stem cell self-renewal and fertility defects in humans carrying AIRE mutations. Self-renewal is one of the defining characteristics of stem cells, allowing cells to proliferate while maintaining differentiation potential, generating new cells to replace old or damaged ones. ES cells possess particularly robust self-renewal capability. They undergo specialized embryo-like cell cycles, limited windows that are responsive to differentiation cues, promoting self-renewal. However, these cell cycles also subject the mitosis process to additional stress. The findings are applicable to advancing the understanding of stem cell biology to help with disease modelling and regenerative medicine.
This study analyzes the rate of new outbreaks, case fatality ratio, and potential for person-to-person transmission of the deadly Ebola virus. The analysis is based on data from all completed outbreaks and includes a scenario of a more severe outbreak. The results show a high case fatality ratio and a reproductive ratio just below 1, indicating that a new epidemic will only infect a small percentage of the population if it is not stopped by interventions or chance extinction. The study emphasizes the urgency of quantitative estimation of epidemiological quantities relevant to Ebola. The analysis suggests no reason for complacency and highlights the need for greater resources to respond to the ongoing epidemic.
This study investigates the development of leg motoneurons required for walking in Drosophila. The authors identify roles for Semaphorins and Plexins in walking behavior and demonstrate that the combined action of different Plexin/Semaphorin signaling systems is required for the formation of a functional myotopic map. The study shows a novel role for glia in positioning dendrites of specific motoneurons, and the mechanism underlying compartmentalization in terms of birth order and distinct axonal and dendritic targeting. A behavioral screen for locomotor defects caused by targeted RNAi knockdown of Semaphorins and Plexins in leg motoneurons was carried out, and PlexA, PlexB, and Sema1a, but not Sema2a, are required for the manifestation of correct locomotor activity. Axonal projection defects were seen in the proximal femur and the distal tibia. Glia also plays a role in positioning dendrites of late-born motoneurons that innervate distal muscles in tibia and occupy lateral regions of the thoracic neuropil in adult Drosophila. The study concludes that the integrative action of multiple Plexin/Semaphorin signaling systems mediates communication between glia and motoneurons and within motoneurons for the correct formation of axonal projections and dendritic arborization in leg motoneuron development.
Ixodes scapularis ticks, which are important carriers of Lyme disease, possess an adiponectin receptor-like protein (ISARL) but lack adiponectin. This suggests that ISARL is activated by alternative pathways. ISARL expression is significantly upregulated in tick guts after Borrelia burgdorferi infection, suggesting that ISARL signaling may be co-opted by the Lyme disease agent. RNA interference-mediated silencing of ISARL significantly reduced the B. burgdorferi burden in the tick, and RNA-seq-based transcriptomics and RNAi assays demonstrate that ISARL-mediated phospholipid metabolism by phosphatidylserine synthase I is associated with B. burgdorferi survival. ISARL-mediated stimulation of I. scapularis metabolic pathways is associated with spirochete colonization. A tick complement C1q-like protein 3 interacts with ISARL, and B. burgdorferi facilitates this process.
Ankyrins are proteins that link ion channels and cell adhesion molecules to the spectrin-based cytoskeleton beneath cell membranes. The three members of the human ankyrin family, ankyrin-R/B/G, are encoded by ANK1/2/3, respectively, and have distinct and non-overlapping functions in specific membrane domains. Ankyrin dysfunction is linked to various diseases due to their essential roles in excitable tissues such as the heart and neurons. Ankyrins bind to numerous membrane targets through their 24 ankyrin repeats, although the mechanism for the evolution of these interactions has not been resolved. In a recent study, the structures of ANK repeats were analyzed and it was found that the inner groove spanning the entire ANK repeat solenoid contains multiple target binding sites capable of accommodating target proteins with diverse sequences. These structures establish a framework for understanding the evolution of ankyrins' membrane targets and for investigating ankyrin's involvement in physiological functions and pathological conditions in diverse tissues.
Researchers have developed a miniaturized bone marrow tissue model that can predict a patient's response to treatment with Eltrombopag, a drug used to treat thrombocytopenic disorders. Using silk fibroin, the 3D model reproduces platelet biogenesis and can provide personalized, pre-treatment response prediction to Eltrombopag for individual patients with inherited thrombocytopenias, which are disorders characterized by low platelet count. The ex vivo response from patient-derived cells and induced pluripotent stem cells strongly correlates with the in vivo platelet response. The device could help reduce ineffective or suboptimal therapies and personalize the choice of the best treatment for each patient.
The study aimed to understand the neural mechanisms behind complex memory of personal events and the coordination between cortical and medial temporal lobe (MTL) representations. The study used magnetoencephalography combined with continuous theta burst stimulation to examine the role of theta and gamma oscillations in network-wide communication during naturalistic memory retrieval and to understand the causal relationship between cortical network nodes and oscillatory communication. The results showed that retrieval was associated with MTL-posterior neocortical theta phase coupling and theta-gamma phase-amplitude coupling relative to a rest period. Precuneus cTBS altered MTL-neocortical communication by modulating theta and gamma oscillatory coupling, suggesting that the precuneus is a critical cortical node of oscillatory activity that coordinates cross-regional interactions that drive remembering. The study also found that theta-gamma coupling facilitates the communication between the MTL and neocortical structures located in the occipital, parietal, retrosplenial, medial prefrontal, and cerebellar regions during memory recollection.
The document describes a genetic program in the pathogenic bacteria Staphylococcus aureus, which generates two different cell types during the course of an infection. One cell type promotes biofilm formation and contributes to chronic infections, while the other produces toxins that contribute to acute bacteremia. This differentiation is regulated by a bimodal switch in the agr quorum sensing system, which is affected by extracellular signals, such as magnesium binding to bacterial cell walls. The size of the specialized subpopulations in specific colonization niches influences the infection outcome. The study shows that cell differentiation in S. aureus helps to diversify the types of infections that arise simultaneously from a clonal population of bacteria.
Loss of Rab7 in eukaryotic cells is linked to adult-onset neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model; mutations in the rab7 gene are thought to cause the dominant neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2B (CMT2B) by a gain-of-function mechanism. However, a study has found that loss of rab7 leads to neurodegeneration, but not overexpressing rab7 CMT2B mutants. Based on imaging and electrophysiology experiments, CMT2B mutants retain some function, indicating a dosage-dependent sensitivity of neurons to rab7-dependent degradation. The study suggests that the neuropathy-like phenotypes of the rab7 mutant can be fully rescued by expressing CMT2B mutants at levels between 0.5 and 10-fold their endogenous levels. Live imaging reveals that CMT2B proteins are inefficiently recruited to endosomes, but do not impair endosomal maturation. The study concludes that the CMT2B alleles are partial loss of function alleles of rab7 that cause, in a dosage-dependent manner, first synaptic and subsequently neuronal degeneration. It posits a therapeutic approach opposite to the currently proposed reduction of mutant protein function.
Inhibitory interneurons in the cerebral cortex target pyramidal cells with precise regulation, but the functional effects on different areas of the pyramidal cell have remained unclear. Researchers analyzed inhibitory synaptic events on cortex fast-spiking basket cells in rats, and found that synapses made on different sites created diverse inhibitory effects. Synapses on pyramidal cell somas provided a strong inhibition, while those on spines caused a strictly local veto. The researchers identified various inhibitory circuits that regulate cortical activity, development and plasticity, and disrupted synapse activity has been associated with pathologies including epilepsy, autism and schizophrenia.  
Marine animals, such as corals and fish, synchronise reproduction with lunar cycles. A study of the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii showed that this timing is orchestrated by an endogenous monthly (circalunar) clock entrained by moonlight. The study established a combined transcriptomic and proteomic profiling approach, which provided the first systematic insight into the molecular changes in Platynereis heads between circalunar phases and across sexual differentiation and maturation. The circalunar clock exhibits only minor transcriptomic, but strong proteomic regulation. The study identified key molecular brain signatures for reproduction, sex, and circalunar clock phase, and demonstrates the importance of appropriate timing to ensure reproductive success. Many species achieve synchronisation through the interplay of multiple timing systems that operate on different time scales, ranging from months or days to hours or even minutes.
The retention and differentiation of paralogous genes, or duplicate genes created by gene duplication, continue to impact metabolism and regulatory network structures long after initial preservation. The GALactose sugar utilization network, which is extensively studied in eukaryotic regulatory and metabolic networks, shows variable network architectures in different yeast lineages. By dissecting the functions of two pairs of ancient paralogs of the GALactose sugar utilization network in two yeast species, researchers found that the Saccharomyces uvarum network is more active due to a second co-repressor that the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae lacks. Removal of this repression system leads to a strong growth arrest, likely due to overly rapid galactose catabolism and metabolic overload. These results show how, after a hundred million years of preservation, two pairs of interacting duplicate genes have continued to diverge functionally in ways that broadly impact metabolism, regulatory network structures, and the future evolutionary trajectories available.
The document discusses the challenges of understanding interspecific cellular divergence and the development of models for the distribution of mean phenotypes under the forces of mutation, genetic drift, and selection. The document highlights the importance of studying cell-biological traits for establishing general evolutionary principles that transcend transient ecological changes. The study draws from well-established quantitative genetics constructs to derive general expressions for the divergence of mean phenotypes among species. The document provides specific expressions for the fitness function and mutation models and concludes by stating that mutation models that capture finite numbers of possible states and state-dependent spectra of mutational effects are needed for the study of cell-biological traits.
The impact of utilizing tissue culture techniques on the plant epigenome of species that are subject to genetic modification is not well understood. This study has generated whole-genome, single-nucleotide maps of DNA methylation in regenerated rice lines that have provided insight into how tissue culture processes affect the epigenome of regenerated crops. DNA methylation levels are distinct in regenerated plants compared with non-regenerated plants, indicating that the stability of DNA methylation is affected by tissue culture processes. Results also suggest that the loss of DNA methylation is linked to altered expression of some genes. Loss of DNA methylation has promoted small interference RNA reduction, which is associated with DNA methylation. Ultimately, these findings may shed light on the somaclonal variation of crops, but more work is needed to comprehend the genome-wide consequences of tissue culture methods.
Hippocampal CA2 pyramidal neurons have unusually strong excitation by their distal dendritic inputs from the entorhinal cortex (EC) due to the ability of EC inputs to drive CA2 action potential (AP) output through dendritic Na+ spikes. The distinct dendritic geometry of CA2 pyramidal neurons contributes to the efficient coupling of dendritic Na+ spikes to AP output. This enables efficient cortico-hippocampal information flow through the EC → CA2 → CA1 disynaptic pathway. In contrast, CA1 neurons are unable to elicit dendritic spikes or somatic APs in response to EC input.
The study found that T-antigen, a truncated core1 O-glycan, is involved in the development of tissue invasion in Drosophila melanogaster macrophages. The paper identifies Minerva, an atypical major facilitator superfamily member, that increases T-antigen levels in proteins pathways linked to cancer, strengthening the sulfhydryl oxidase Qsox1 which is required for macrophage tissue entry. Additionally, the study characterizes the T and Tn glycoform O-glycoproteome of the Drosophila melanogaster embryo, and determines the role of glycosylation in the activation of a program governing migration steps important for both development and cancer metastasis. The T antigen is normally not found on mature human cells but is present on cancer cells and correlates with cancer aggressiveness. The study also found that T antigen is needed for efficient tissue invasion and identified CG8602, a predicted member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily, as a possible regulator of T antigen levels in Drosophila melanogaster macrophages.
Forskolin, a plant-derived labdane-type diterpenoid used in the treatment of glaucoma and heart failure, is currently sourced only from the plant Coleus forskohlii. Researchers report identifying five cytochrome P450s and two acetyltransferases involved in the conversion of the forskolin precursor 13R-manoyl oxide into forskolin and a diverse array of additional labdane-type diterpenoids. Three P450s in combination with a single acetyl transferase were identified as the minimal set required for the conversion of 13R-manoyl oxide into forskolin. The entire pathway for forskolin production from glucose was integrated into Saccharomyces cerevisiae and afforded forskolin titers of 40 mg/L. This method offers a more clear and stable alternative to traditional extraction and purification procedures needed to obtain pharmaceutically pure forskolin.
The study analyzed the role of colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) in macrophage development using csf1r-deficient zebrafish. The study found that primitive macrophages can emerge in the absence of CSF1R, but they subsequently fail to colonize embryonic tissues due to a lack of proliferation. The study also identified a wave of ectoderm-derived macrophage-like cells, called metaphocytes, in csf1r-deficient larvae. The study showed that adult csf1r-deficient zebrafish exhibit systemic macrophage depletion. The study highlighted the distinct requirements for CSF1R during macrophage generation and metaphocyte ontogeny, which may have universal features of organism-wide macrophage development.
A new method for analyzing correlated mutations in proteins uses a combined analysis of amino acid and codon multiple sequence alignments. The premise is that direct contacts are more likely if the correlation at the amino acid level is high but at the codon level is low. This new method has been shown to improve contact prediction and identify contact between residues that are distant in sequence. The output of methods for correlated mutation analysis is a rank order of pairs of columns in the alignment. Several existing methods have been successful in identifying contacting residues, but their accuracy drops for high ranked predictions. Further improvements in methods of correlated mutation analysis can be made, and future work should test other potential applications of combined analysis of amino acid and codon multiple sequence alignments.
This study presents a new human-based ventricular model for simulations of electrophysiology and excitation-contraction coupling, called ToR-ORd. The model is designed to simulate healthy and diseased conditions, and drug blockade, and accounts for inconsistencies found in current models based on experimental data. The study includes an in-depth re-evaluation of the L-type calcium current, enabling its reformulation, as well as re-assessment of the rapid delayed rectifier current, under conditions that reflect experimental data-driven plateau potentials. The model is calibrated and validated against a comprehensive list of properties characterizing human ventricular electrophysiology across multiple stimulation rates, drug action and disease. The simulations support the credibility of the ToR-ORd model under a variety of conditions, and the study provides new theoretical insights into the biophysical properties of the L-type calcium current. The ToR-ORd model is a fundamental asset of biomedical research, empowering detailed mechanistic and systematic investigations.
The maturation of cytosolic and nuclear iron-sulfur proteins, which are essential for various pathways including DNA maintenance, requires the cytosolic Fe-S protein assembly (CIA) machinery. Yae1 and Lto1 were discovered as new CIA proteins that facilitate the Fe-S cluster assembly on ribosome-associated ABC protein Rli1 in a chain of binding events. Yae1 and Lto1, which are conserved in humans, act as a target-specific adaptor that recruits apo-Rli1 to the CIA machinery. The CIA machinery and the mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) assembly machinery, which generates the organellar Fe-S proteins and is essential for the biogenesis of cytosolic and nuclear Fe-S proteins, function together to maintain Fe-S protein function, which affects DNA metabolism and can activate the DNA damage response pathway. The interactions between the various CIA components were investigated through tandem affinity purifications and mass spectrometry and interactions among the CIA targeting complex (Cia1-Cia2-Mms19), the Fe-S protein Rli1, and the essential proteins Yae1 and Lto1 were identified. Although Yae1 and Lto1 do not contain any conserved cysteine residues and are not Fe-S protein targets, they act as novel target-specific CIA maturation factors for Fe-S cluster assembly on Rli1.
Endothelial cells play a crucial role in the formation and stabilisation of blood vessels in vertebrate development and tissue growth. The interaction between molecular signals and shear-mediated physical forces is poorly understood so researchers investigated the role of non-canonical Wnt signalling in regulating endothelial sensitivity to shear forces. They found that loss of Wnt5a/Wnt11 renders endothelial cells more sensitive to shear, resulting in axial polarization and migration against flow at lower shear levels. This leads to premature and excessive vessel regression and accelerated remodelling in mice. The study suggests that non-canonical Wnt signaling can stabilize forming vascular networks by reducing endothelial shear sensitivity, keeping vessels open under low flow conditions.
Histone H3 threonine 118 (H3 T118ph) weakens histone DNA contacts, disrupting the nucleosome structure. H3 T118ph is phosphorylated by Aurora-A at pericentromeres and chromosome arms during prophase, before disappearing upon chromosome alignment. The presence of H3 T118E or H3 T118I in human cells leads to mitotic problems, and over-expressed Aurora-A increases H3 T118ph levels, causing cohesion loss and reduced levels of cohesin and condensin I on chromatin. Normal levels of H3 T118ph are important because it is required for development in fruit flies. H3 T118ph is vital for promoting timely condensin I and cohesin disassociation, which aids effective chromosome segregation during mitosis.
Researchers investigated how immature and mature granule cells (GC) in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus respond to input frequency. Using electrophysiological recordings, they found that while immature GC respond to a wider range of stimulus frequencies, mature GC are less responsive at high frequencies due to stronger feedforward inhibition. However, the stronger inhibition of mature GC results in higher temporal fidelity compared to that of immature GC. The researchers suggest that immature and mature GC reflect complementary aspects of incoming activity. These findings contribute to the understanding of how excitation and inhibition interact to determine the response of GC in the DG.
Scientists have discovered that drugs with broad polypharmacology, which have often been considered "dirtier" drugs, can have unique efficacy by combining deleterious effects on parasites with beneficial actions in the host. The basis for this discovery was a screen for drugs to treat schistosomiasis, a parasitic flatworm disease that affects over 230 million people. The study shows that ergotamine, a potent agonist, which disrupts worm movement, can reduce mortality, parasite load, and intestinal egg counts while also uniquely reducing organ pathology through engagement of host GPCRs that repressed hepatic stellate cell activation, inflammatory damage, and fibrosis. The study suggests that agents like ergotamine that can engage both host and parasite GPCRs have the potential for anthelmintic drug design.
The use of antibiotics is known to affect the prevalence of antibiotic resistance in bacteria, but little is known about how antibiotics affect within-host resistance dynamics. Researchers developed a data-driven model of the within-host dynamics of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing Enterobacteriaceae and found that cefuroxime and ceftriaxone were associated with increased blaCTX-M abundance during treatment, while treatment with meropenem, piperacillin-tazobactam, and oral ciprofloxacin was associated with decreased blaCTX-M. The model predicts that typical antibiotic exposures can have substantial long-term effects on blaCTX-M carriage duration. Quantifying within-host selection dynamics should lead to a better understanding of both individual patient-level and population-level risks and benefits of antibiotic use.
Researchers at the University of Washington have used single particle cryo-electron microscopy and single channel recording to assign functional states to high-resolution structures of SthK, a prokaryotic cyclic nucleotide-gated channel. This technique allowed the researchers to develop an understanding of how binding of cyclic nucleotides elicits diverse functional responses within the family, despite their high sequence and structure homology. The study revealed an unexpected resting, apo-like ligand binding pocket within both cAMP-bound and cGMP-bound SthK structures, which could provide insights into partial agonism in SthK.
The study investigates the role of Oct1 in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) by constructing ESC lines that lack Oct1. It is found that Oct1-deficient ESCs appear normal when undifferentiated but have defects in differentiation such as an inability to form beating cardiomyocytes, generate neurons poorly, and form poorly differentiated teratomas. Oct1 is found to be a key mediator of both developmental-specific gene induction and repression, and plays a role in the critical period immediately after loss of pluripotency when cells make the earliest developmental fate decisions. The study also identifies a dynamic interplay between Oct1 and Oct4, another protein crucial to the properties of pluripotency, in maintaining the properties of the regulatory circuitry. Overall, Oct1 is found to restrict extra-embryonic gene expression in differentiating ESCs and to replace Oct4 at target genes as ESCs differentiate and the early decisions about the induction or repression of lineage-specific genes are made.
The study introduces and analyzes a consumer-resource model to explain the mechanisms and principal determinants of multistability in microbial communities. The model includes microbes that compete for two types of essential nutrients represented by multiple different metabolites. The results suggest that multistability requires microbial species to have different stoichiometries of essential nutrients and a balanced nutrient supply promotes multistability and species diversity but makes individual community states less stable. The study uses game-theoretical methods of the stable matching problem to identify all possible species compositions of such microbial communities and classify them by their resilience against three types of perturbations: fluctuations in nutrient supply, invasions by new species, and small changes of abundances of existing ones.
A new study has identified a new morphogenetic pathway, from signalling to effector, that promotes "basement membrane sliding," which, alongside cell sliding, allows tissues to regenerate and rebuild. The pathway was identified in the model organism C. elegans, during the uterine-vulval attachment process, which relies on an invasive uterine anchor cell, and a neighbouring protein ctg-1, which operates to limit the cell surface trafficking of DGN-1, which in turn encourages the sliding.

Researchers have developed a double-sided microscope that can simultaneously record the membrane potential dynamics of a large population of neurons in single cell resolution, which can greatly facilitate studies of neuronal network emergence during sensory processing and motor control. They applied this system to the segmental ganglia of the medicinal leech and found that double-sided VSD imaging enabled simultaneous recording of membrane potential events from almost all the identifiable neurons. Using data obtained from double-sided VSD imaging, they analyzed neuronal dynamics in both sensory processing and generation of behavior and constructed functional maps for identification of neurons contributing to these processes. This new technology can detect both sub-threshold depolarizing and hyperpolarizing synaptic events, making it a more convenient tool to observe synaptic integration processes than Ca2+ indicators. Double-sided VSD imaging requires simultaneously focusing two fluorescent microscopes, which is achieved by mounting the fluorescence train of an Olympus BX upright microscope with a custom focus rack on top of the body of an Olympus IX inverted microscope. Researchers can perform pan-neuronal Ca2+ imaging in selected animals with nervous systems comprising small neuronal populations, such as larval zebrafish or C. elegans. The central nervous system of the leech consists of a ventral nerve cord connecting a head brain, 21 nearly identical segmental ganglia, and a tail brain. The segmental ganglion of the leech is particularly well suited for comprehensive recording using VSD imaging because it consists of only about 400 identifiable neurons, mostly as bilateral pairs, arranged in a well-preserved geometry in a single spherical shell surrounding a central neuropil, and it functions as a basic unit of sensory processing and control of several behaviors. One of the major advantages of VSDs is that recorded traces can be directly compared to intracellular voltage recordings.
A mutation in the proinsulin gene can lead to permanent neonatal diabetes, and is caused by early life events inducing ER stress which affect β-cell mass expansion due to transient inhibition of mTOR. Restoration of mTORC1 activity in neonate β-cells was sufficient to rescue postnatal β-cell growth and improve diabetes. ER stress is implicated in the regulation of β-cell proliferation. Developmental insults during gestation, such as malnutrition, and increased exposure to glucocorticoids are known to restrict the number of β-cells formed in the fetal pancreas, which is maintained in adulthood. In utero β-cell development in Akita mice is only minimally impaired, and β-cell loss must occur after birth. Akita β-cell mass is decreased due to impaired postnatal β-cell growth early in life, prior to the onset of full-blown diabetes, and beta-cell failure is the fundamental pathophysiological factor of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
The researchers developed a quantitative assay for measuring the secretion of Acyl CoA binding protein 1 (Acb1) in yeast cells through the unconventional secretory pathway. They discovered that ESCRT-I, -II, and -III are involved in Acb1 secretion, but Vps4 was not required. They also found that the major ESCRT-III subunit Snf7 attaches to a compartment called CUPS, which is involved in Acb1 secretion. The researchers were able to measure the secretion of full-length Acb1 by extracting the yeast cell wall without causing cell lysis. This assay provides a quantitative and reliable measure of Acb1 secretion, allowing for the study of the mechanism of unconventional protein secretion.
The rat parahippocampal region (PHR) and retrosplenial cortex (RSC) are important for spatial cognition. The first arriving RSC-axons in PHR show a topographical organization similar to that seen in adults, but the labeled plexus does not obtain adult-like densities until about P12. The PHR has two functionally different networks, one of which involves spatial functions while the other is important for object representation and processing of contextual information. PHR emerges at different periods during development, and head-direction cells appear before eye-opening. Injections of rats at different postnatal ages were used to investigate RSC projection patterns in PHR. Most of the experiments were performed in animals aged P15 or younger since other comparable corticocortical projections are developed before eye-opening and the functional cell types are present in HF-PHR at this age. The location of the injections in the brain of different ages was age-normalized by the use of a 3D-atlas brain.
Cavin-3 is a tumor suppressor protein that regulates the balance between ERK and Akt signaling pathways. Loss of cavin-3 results in increased Akt signaling, while an increase in cavin-3 results in increased ERK signaling. Cavin-3 facilitates signal transduction to ERK by anchoring caveolae to the membrane skeleton of the plasma membrane via myosin-1c. Loss of cavin-3 suppresses EGR1 and PTEN, resulting in an increase in Warburg metabolism (aerobic glycolysis), accelerated cell proliferation, and resistance to apoptosis. Cavin-3 plays a role in caveolae formation and internalization, through its interactions with the caveolin family of integral membrane proteins, and the loss of cavin-3 is linked to cancer in multiple tissues. Knockdown of cavin-3 suppresses the ability of EGF to induce most immediate early (IE) response genes, suggesting that loss of cavin-3 suppresses ERK signaling. Cavin-3 expression is necessary for efficient ERK activation.
The article discusses the concept of relative value perception in decision-making, and how it applies not only to humans, but also to animals such as ants. The authors conducted experiments to demonstrate how ants' expectations and social information influence their evaluation of food sources, and how this in turn affects foraging behavior of the colony as a whole. The experiments also explore the effects of positive and negative incentive contrasts on ants' behavior, and provide evidence for a purely cognitive relative value effect in the ants. The article highlights the importance of understanding relative value perception in decision-making, and suggests that it plays a significant role in the foraging mechanics of animal colonies.
The study explores the reversible nature of enzyme evolution, and examines the molecular basis for the relationship between protein sequence, structure and function. It focuses on the enzyme phosphotriesterase (PTE), which was evolved into an arylesterase and then back again, with the underlying molecular changes examined in each case. The study found that although PTE function could be restored to wild-type levels, it was done through an alternative set of mutations that converged towards the enzyme's original state. The study also found that many amino acid exchanges between the new and original enzyme were not tolerated, implying sequence incompatibility, and that the evolutionary dynamics underlying phenotypic reversion have not been addressed. Further research could improve the ability to design and engineer novel proteins in the laboratory, identifying which structural changes are required to switch from one function to another.
The article discusses the high variability in reaction time (RT) in studies of voluntary movement and explains that this is due to the rise-to-threshold process starting from a dynamic initial state that already contains incipient, internally driven motor plans that compete with the target-driven activity. The article proposes a model based on computational work and single-neuron recordings from monkey frontal eye field (FEF) that accounts for the observed RT distributions while invoking only a small amount of intrinsic randomness. The article further discusses the importance of RT as a fundamental metric for inferring the mechanisms that mediate cognition and explains that the variance of RT for saccades to single targets is deterministic because of motor selection mechanisms that allow voluntary saccades to be driven by both sensory events and internal biases. Finally, the article describes the experimental conditions and results from the 1DR task in two rhesus monkeys that generate errors and a large spread in RT, and investigates how the variance in saccadic performance relates to the variance in the FEF activity.
Plant growth regulation is not well understood, but researchers at the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna have discovered that the phytohormone auxin impacts the shape of the biggest plant organelle, the vacuole, and therefore has an effect on cellular growth. Auxin affects vacuolar SNARE conponents via posttranslational control, and loss of the vacuolar SNARE VTI11 results in cell insensitivity to auxin-dependent growth inhibition. Auxin can limit cellular expansion through SNARE-dependent vacuolar morphogenesis, thereby contributing towards root organ growth rates.
The replisome is a machine that duplicates DNA during replication. The Escherichia coli replisome has been characterized in vitro and in vivo as composed of over 12 different proteins. DNA synthesis is performed by the Pol III polymerase and the DnaB helicase unwinds parental DNA, while the Pol III holoenzyme associates with DnaB through the clamp loader. The Pol III subassembly frequently disengages from the replisome during DNA synthesis and exchanges with free copies from the solution. In contrast, the DnaB helicase associates stably with the replication fork to maintain high processivity and bypass obstructions in template DNA. This study challenges the semi-discontinuous model of chromosomal replication and supports a fully discontinuous mechanism where synthesis of both leading and lagging strands is frequently interrupted. The researchers measured the binding kinetics of replisome subunits during DNA replication using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) in strains possessing fluorescent derivatives of key replisome components. They found that the entire Pol III subassembly is replaced within the replisome frequently, equivalent to a few cycles of Okazaki fragment synthesis. This suggests that DNA replication is a discontinuous process on both strands. They propose that this dynamic stability provides the replisome with flexibility to bypass frequent obstacles on DNA while maintaining the necessary processivity for chromosomal replication.
Researchers have conducted a comprehensive time-course analysis of over 6,500 viral and cellular proteins during HIV infection using a multiplex tandem mass tag (TMT) based whole cell proteomics. It identified viral accessory protein Vif as necessary for the degradation of B56 subunits of the PP2A phosphatase. Vif also causes hyperphosphorylation of over 200 cellular proteins, particularly aurora kinase substrates. The study demonstrates that viruses have the ability to manipulate host factors to optimise the cellular environment for viral replication and that Vif is conserved across primates and animals. The results suggest that antagonism of PP2A-B56 is an “ancient and conserved Vif function” and that cellular proteins regulated by HIV can be identified using unbiased plasma membrane proteomic techniques.
Two experiments have shown that the olfactory ability of chiral discrimination, meaning the ability to distinguish between two nonidentical mirror image forms of molecules called enantiomers, can be acquired through learning by human adults. Unlike earlier beliefs, these experiments showed that the training-induced perceptual gain was restricted to the trained nostril, suggesting that one nostril does not readily know what the other learns. Moreover, the initial analytical processing of the structural features of uninarial olfactory input remains plastic in human adults. Overall, these findings suggest that the plasticity underpinning the acquisition of chiral discrimination originates in early olfactory regions that analyze the structural features (i.e. chirality) of uninarial olfactory input.
Interleukin 6 (IL-6) plays a crucial role in regulating CD4 T helper cell differentiation and cytokine production, and is associated with several autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. This study has identified a novel molecular mechanism by which IL-6 regulates CD4 cell effector function. The study shows that IL-6-dependent signals facilitate the formation of mitochondrial respiratory chain supercomplexes to sustain high mitochondrial membrane potential late during activation of CD4 T cells. Mitochondrial hyperpolarization caused by IL-6 is uncoupled from the production of ATP by oxidative phosphorylation, but is used to raise the levels of mitochondrial Ca2+ late during activation of CD4 cells. Increased levels of mitochondrial Ca2+ in the presence of IL-6 are used to prolong Il4 and Il21 expression in effector CD4 cells. The study concludes that the effect of IL-6 on mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial Ca2+ is an alternative pathway by which IL-6 regulates effector function of CD4 cells and it could contribute to the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases.
Researchers have investigated how the brain estimates time durations of several minutes in length. They found that when contextual factors change, individuals tend to overestimate the length of the duration. The researchers examined the neural patterns in the medial temporal lobes and prefrontal cortex, which represent contextual information, and found that the degree of pattern change between events correlated with how much time individuals estimated had passed. This suggests that contextual information stored in the brain can help individuals determine time intervals after they occur. The study also found that the right entorhinal cortex and the right anterior temporal lobe were associated with this process.
The primary cilium, an organelle found on the surface of many cells, plays a crucial role in multiple pathways involved in development and homeostasis. During ciliogenesis, newly synthesized membrane proteins destined for the cilium are transported via as yet poorly characterized motors to specialized regions of the plasma membrane near the base of the organelle, and enter the cilium as the organelle elongates. After the cilium is fully formed, the protein composition of the ciliary membrane does not remain fixed, but is dynamically regulated during cilium-generated signaling. Recently, it has been shown that the retrograde intraflagellar transport (IFT) motor cytoplasmic dynein 1b is required for the rapid redistribution of SAG1-C65, a membrane polypeptide, to the periciliary region and the ciliary membrane. The retrograde IFT motor acts in the cytoplasm to enrich SAG1-C65 in the peri-ciliary region concomitant with entry of the protein into the ciliary membrane. SAG1-C65 is shed during signaling and can be recovered in the form of ciliary ectosomes that retain signal-inducing activity.
Pulmonary tuberculosis is characterized by the formation of granulomas, macrophage-rich cellular structures that attempt to contain the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection. These can lead to Mtb growth and spread, and it is not yet well understood why some granulomas can control the infection while others do not. In this study, the researchers used live cell imaging to track Mtb infection outcomes in individual primary human macrophages. They found that the internalization of Mtb aggregates caused macrophage death, and phagocytosis of large aggregates was more cytotoxic than multiple small aggregates containing similar numbers of bacilli. Once the host cell was killed, Mtb was able to rapidly grow inside the dead infected macrophage regardless of prior activation or macrophage type. These observations of a cycle of host cell death followed by bacterial replication could drive Mtb infection dynamics of necrosis and bacterial proliferation in lung granulomas of patients with active tuberculosis disease.
Drosophila melanogaster males sing a species-specific courtship song that is important for female receptivity and encourages courtship by nearby males. However, the neural circuits underlying sexually dimorphic behavior in Drosophila are not well understood. Here, researchers have identified a male-specific pathway for courtship hearing in the fly via aPN1-vPN1-pC1 pathway, which provides a labeled line for the processing and transformation of courtship song in males. The study suggests the pathway as a site for multimodal integration of courtship stimuli. It also identifies a critical fruM+ interneuron type, that is responsible for ventrolateral protocerebrum Projection Neuron 1 (vPN1) neurons. This study provides anatomical, behavioral, and physiological evidence that the pathway provides a labeled line for processing courtship song in Drosophila.
The document discusses homeostatic scaling at central synapses and the mechanisms that allow neurons to adjust their synapses to stabilize neuronal functions in response to an offset from a setpoint. The study examines the time-dependent dynamics of the response to an activity manipulation in cultured hippocampal cells using BONCAT to metabolically label newly synthesized proteins. The researchers identified a significant number of newly synthesized proteins with little overlap between early and late response datasets. They found overlap in the functional categories that are modulated both early and late, suggesting different choices are made to effect early and late homeostatic responses within protein function groups. The study also found that manipulating activity resulted in proteins' up- or down-regulation associated with different functional groups, reflecting the 'sign' of the manipulation. Additionally, the unique proteomic response evolves over time, and the distinctiveness of the proteomic response evolves as the duration of the treatment increases, suggesting a more focused response on the homeostatic effector mechanism.
The role of serotonin (5-HT) in insect immunity has been unclear, but a study has found that hemocytes in Pieris rapae caterpillars can synthesise the chemical following activation by lipopolysaccharide. The addition of 5-HT could restore the impaired phagocytosis ability that had been blocked using a genetic or chemical inhibitor. Biochemical and functional experiments showed that naive hemocytes primarily express 5-HT1B and 5-HT2B receptors. The 5-HT1B-null Drosophila melanogaster mutants who had been infected with bacteria showed higher mortality than controls. The study also found that 5-HT could enhance hemocyte phagocytosis.
RNA polymerase errors may contribute to cellular variability, but current methods for measuring fidelity are limited. The author developed a method using standard RNA sequencing protocols to measure RNA polymerase fidelity and found that RNA polymerase is error-prone and these errors can result in splicing defects. Differential expression of RNA polymerase subunits leads to changes in fidelity, and coding sequences may have evolved to minimize these errors. The author also developed a method to avoid alignment using spliced aligners. The author used this method to count error rates around splice junctions and calculated mono-, di-, and trinucleotide background error rates. The parental strain DBY12394 was transformed with a PCR product to generate an inducible RPB9 or DST1, and the strains were grown under different conditions. The author used bwa and samtools mpileup to align and count reads, and duplicate reads were removed if the coverage was low enough. The author also analyzed intron retention in human cells and used data from NCBI SRA PRJNA253670, PRJNA167772, PRJNA148851, and undefined data from the Gingeras lab at CSHL for RPB9 correlation.
Researchers have developed a model that helps to explain the way in which virus capsids assemble around their nucleic acid genomes, providing insight that could be used to prevent viral replication and/or re-engineer capsids for gene therapy applications. They have used computational modeling based on a simplified model to investigate the effects of electrostatics, capsid geometry and nucleic acid size on assembly. From their work, researchers found that capsids overcharge spontaneously - a thermodynamic basis for selective encapsidation can be explained through the electrostatics of nucleic acids in the capsid. Results from their model suggest that electrostatics, excluded volume and nucleic acid tertiary structure are sufficient to predict assembly thermodynamics. Optimal nucleic acid lengths were closely linked to those of natural genome lengths, something that could be used to identify targets for new antiviral drugs that block or derail the formation of infectious virions.
This document discusses the role of Notch signaling in skeletal myogenesis, the process of muscle growth and regeneration. The study shows that Notch signaling is essential for the maintenance of myogenic stem cells, but its function in late-stage myogenesis, i.e. post-differentiation myocytes and post-fusion myotubes, is unknown. Activation of Notch1 in myotubes upregulates the expression of Notch ligands, which modulate Notch signaling in the adjacent satellite cells to enhance their regenerative capacity. Notch signaling transduction is initiated upon binding of a Notch receptor (Notch1-4) with a ligand (Dll1, Dll4, Jag1, Jag2) located on a neighbor cell. In postnatal myogenesis, Notch signaling is indispensable for maintaining quiescence and self-renewal of satellite cells. The study shows that activation of Notch signaling dedifferentiates myocytes into Pax7-expressing satellite cells, leading to defective myogenesis. By contrast, activation of Notch signaling in post-fusion myotubes/myofibers restores functionality and regenerative capacity of aged and dystrophic muscles. The study provides insight into the mechanism underlying muscle dedifferentiation and underscores the potential of Notch 1 signaling for developing therapies for geriatric muscle disease, where the satellite cell number is limited. The study also highlights context-dependent effects of Notch activation during myogenesis and demonstrates that Notch1 activity improves myotube’s function as a stem cell niche.
IL17 cytokines play a central role in mammalian immunity and are derived from diverse cellular sources in vertebrates. Sea urchins share a molecular heritage with chordates that includes the IL17 system. In the larval stage of the purple sea urchin, exposure to the Gram-negative bacterium Vibrio diazotrophicus induces a distinct cellular response which includes the migration of pigment cells to the gut epithelium, changes in cell behavior and altered gut morphology. Researchers investigated the transcriptional underpinnings of this response and found that two small subfamilies of IL17 genes emerge as highly regulated factors during the early response. Functional data indicate that disruption of IL17 signaling leads to decreased expression of several immune regulators and effector genes in the gut epithelium. These findings indicate that epithelial expression of IL17 family regulators is central to an ancient aspect of gut immunity.
The protein SRSF1, which regulates splicing and activates translation in the cytoplasm, has been found to be involved in the regulation of genes associated with cell division. The protein is known to be overexpressed in several types of cancer, and is therefore a potential target for cancer therapies. The study involved a high-throughput deep sequencing analysis of polysomal fractions in cells overexpressing SRSF1, identifying approximately 1500 mRNAs that are translational targets of the protein. These included mRNAs encoding proteins involved in cell cycle regulation. Furthermore, it was shown that translational activity of SRSF1 is required for normal mitotic progression. The SR protein family, to which SRSF1 belongs, is known to shuttle from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and has a role in both constitutive and alternative splicing.
The study identifies a dormancy state in Trypanosoma cruzi, the agent responsible for Chagas disease, which accounts for the failure of current drug treatments. The researchers found that a small population of "non-replicating" amastigotes were resistant to drug treatment and could re-establish a flourishing infection after extended drug exposure. The study used in vivo and in vitro experiments to look at the replication status of parasites and found evidence of heterogeneity of amastigotes in host cells. The researchers suggest that the ability of T. cruzi to establish dormancy throws into question current methods for identifying curative drugs but also suggests alternative therapeutic approaches.
Researchers have identified a mechanism that allows the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to alter its ascaroside pheromone message in response to changing environmental conditions without synthesizing new ascarosides. Specifically, the worm can dynamically tailor the fatty-acid side chains of the indole-3-carbonyl (IC)-modified ascarosides it has produced. In response to starvation, C. elegans uses the peroxisomal acyl-CoA synthetase ACS-7 to activate the side chains of medium-chain IC-ascarosides for beta-oxidation involving the acyl-CoA oxidases ACOX-1.1 and ACOX-3. This pathway rapidly converts a favorable ascaroside pheromone that induces aggregation to an unfavorable one that induces the stress-resistant dauer larval stage. Researchers have established a new model for biosynthesis of the IC-ascarosides in which side-chain beta-oxidation is critical for controlling the type of IC-ascarosides produced.
The DeBias algorithm is a method to separate global bias from local interactions in the analysis of coupled variables in cell biology, such as co-localization and co-orientation of two spatial variables. Global bias refers to external effectors that may influence the observed relationship between two variables independent from their local interaction. DeBias quantifies the contributions of global bias and local interaction components to the observed relationship between two variables by modeling the observed co-localization or co-orientation as the cumulative contribution of a global and a local component. The software package is freely accessible online.
Researchers have discovered a neural structure that regulates bird song, according to their study in the journal eLife. The research centres around the zebra finch nucleus HVC (RA), which is responsible for coordinating the activation of vocal muscles during reproduction trials. The team used a structural approach involving anatomical reconstructions of complete cells in light microscopy, coupled with high-throughput serial block-face electron microscopy, to identify the neural mechanisms underlying the pacing of bird song. They found neural sequences that articulate a song are generated by global synaptic chains in HVC (RA) embedded within local inhibitory networks.
Plants have the ability to adapt to environmental stress by maintaining an active memory of the stress for several days. Researchers have identified the FORGETTER1 (FGT1) locus as playing a key role in this process, with fgt1 mutants displaying reduced maintenance of heat-induced gene expression. FGT1 encodes the Arabidopsis thaliana orthologue of Strawberry notch, a conserved co-activator of the developmental regulator Notch. The protein is associated with the promoter regions of actively expressed genes in a heat-dependent fashion and interacts with chromatin remodelers of the SWI/SNF and ISWI families. Together, the results suggest that FGT1 mediates stress-induced chromatin memory by modulating nucleosome occupancy. Such stress priming and memory may be particularly beneficial to sessile plants in the face of recurrent stress.
The role of the decapentagplegic (dpp) stripe in controlling growth and patterning of the Drosophila wing disc has been debated. Two previous studies gave conflicting results, with one proposing that the dpp stripe is required for patterning but not growth, whereas the other suggested that Dpp dispersal from the stripe is required for patterning and medial wing disc growth. This study removes dpp from the stripe at different time points and demonstrates that the dpp stripe source is required for wing disc growth during third instar larval stages. The ptc-Gal4 line was found to better reflect endogenous dpp expression than the dpp-Gal4 line used in previous studies. Removing dpp using ptc-Gal4 severely affected wing disc growth and resulted in loss of pMad signal except in the future alula region.
Researchers have discovered that proteasomes, the 2.5-MDa proteolytic machines that catabolize proteins into short peptides and are essential for protein homeostasis, are protected from autophagic degradation through the formation of cytoplasmic puncta called proteasome storage granules (PSGs) during carbon starvation. These PSGs help protect proteasomes from the degradation that occurs upon nitrogen starvation, which stimulates the process of proteaphagy. The study has identified that both the core protease and regulatory particle sub-complexes are sequestered separately into PSGs with the aid of accessory proteins Blm10 and Spg5, respectively. More research is required to understand how and why PSGs form. It is hoped this study will aid in understanding the relationship between PSGs and proteaphagy, and how metabolic dysfunctions can lead to devastating neurodegenerative diseases. The research also reveals striking parallels between PSG formation and autophagy and re-release of cellular components during nutrient depletion and the formation of membrane-less condensates during various cellular processes.
Several studies have suggested that after a Zika virus outbreak, infected individuals would have long-term immunity, leading to herd immunity and preventing further outbreaks. However, research conducted in French Polynesia and Fiji has found that seroprevalence declined in both countries over a two-year period after the first reported Zika transmission, with a significant decline in neutralizing antibody titres against Zika, but not against dengue viruses that circulated during the same period. The decline in seroprevalence was concentrated in adults, while high seroprevalence persisted in children. The study suggests that the long-term immune response to Zika following an outbreak remains unclear.
Researchers have identified a taste neuron in fruit flies that inhibits sugar consumption. In contrast to other sugar-sensing taste neurons that promote sugar intake, this neuron limits sucrose consumption in Drosophila. Silencing the neuron increases sucrose feeding, while activating it reduces sugar uptake. The feeding inhibition depends on the IR60b receptor. The researchers propose a dynamic model in which sucrose acts via IR60b to activate a circuit that inhibits feeding and prevents overconsumption. The study identifies a new element in the circuit logic of feeding regulation and may help develop strategies to prevent overconsumption in animals.
Contrary to the hypothesis that the movement of ATP synthesis from the cell surface to mitochondrial membranes led to a bioenergetics revolution and the transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, a quantitative analysis of bioenergetic costs and benefits suggests that eukaryotic cells are not more bioenergetically efficient than prokaryotes. The establishment of the mitochondrion did not provide a direct, causal role in the shift from prokaryotes to eukaryotes and the subsequent emergence of complex life forms. The bioenergetic features of eukaryotic cells are consistent with those in bacteria and the bioenergetic efficiency of eukaryotic cells declines with cell volume, whereas that of bacterial cells does not. The data are inconsistent with the idea that the mitochondrion instigated a massive expansion in the surface area of bioenergetic membranes in eukaryotes. Packing density estimates for ATP synthase and electron transport chain complexes suggest a continuous allometric function with no dichotomous break between bacteria and eukaryotes. Any attempt to determine the implications of membranes for cellular evolution must account for the high biosynthetic costs of lipid molecules.
A new study identifies a previously unknown mutation that causes severe hypertension and primary aldosteronism. Five out of forty subjects with hypertension due to primary aldosteronism before the age of ten were found to carry the same previously unidentified mutation in CACNA1H. The mutation was found to produce increased intracellular calcium, which signals for aldosterone production, explaining the disease pathogenesis. This finding highlights the usefulness of genome-level sequencing for identifying rare Mendelian traits, especially extreme childhood phenotypes.
Researchers have discovered a new mechanism by which mitochondria and endosomes work together to protect cells from oxidative stress. Mitochondria are organelles that help regulate cellular processes, including ATP production, apoptosis and calcium signaling. Rab5, a small GTPase protein, is found on early endosomes and is essential for the endocytic pathway to take up and degrade certain molecules from the cell. The researchers found that, upon cellular stressors like oxidative stress, Rab5 translocates from early endosomes to mitochondria, and that activation of Rab5 on mitochondria depends on the Rab5-GEF ALS2/Alsin protein. The study suggests that endosomes play a crucial role in regulating mitochondrial quality control during the onset of neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The structure and dynamics of the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PI3KC3-C1), which is involved in autophagy, were studied using single-particle EM and hydrogen-deuterium exchange. The complex was found to have a V-shaped architecture and consists of the lipid kinase VPS34, scaffolding protein VPS15, tumor suppressor BECN1 and autophagy-specific subunit ATG14. VPS15 organizes the complex and serves as a bridge between VPS34 and the ATG14:BECN1 subcomplex. The subunit architecture and dynamics of PI3KC3-C1 were defined, providing a framework for understanding the allosteric regulation of lipid kinase activity. This information is essential to understanding how autophagy is initiated and how it is regulated, and to addressing the potential for therapeutic modulation of PI3KC3-C1 in diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders.
The study examined the perceptual distinction between blinks and gaps in the visual cortex of 14 human patients. While both blinks and gaps caused a similar drop in activity level in early visual areas (V1 and V2), gaps triggered a greater post-reappearance overshoot compared to blinks. The study found that the discontinuity caused by gaps was perceived more saliently than that caused by blinks. Furthermore, the study could not find any evidence of filling-in or continuous neural activity in response to blinks. The study suggests that the perceived continuity of the visual input despite the frequent interruptions of spontaneous eye blinks is a dissociation between sensation and perception that may not depend on a continuous neural representation in category-selective visual areas, but rather on the lack of representation of discontinuities such as stimulus disappearance and reappearance.
A study on a large elderly population in Bangalore, India aimed to investigate whether gamma rhythms could be used as a biomarker for early diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Researchers found that stimulus-induced gamma rhythms were significantly lower in MCI and AD subjects compared to their age- and gender-matched controls, while alpha or steady-state visually evoked responses did not vary significantly. The study suggested that gamma rhythms could be a potential screening tool for MCI and AD in humans.
Researchers have discovered a protein, UNC-8, that triggers the removal of synapses in an activity-dependent mechanism in developing GABAergic neurons. The protein is regulated by both genetic and activity-dependent pathways that function together to promote the elimination of GABA synapses. This newly discovered pathway may explain a mechanism that brain circuits use for refinement when developing to produce a mature and functional nervous system.
Researchers have developed a method to reconstruct and quantify the visual scene of freely moving mice performing a visually-based prey capture task. They isolated the visual sense and combined a mouse eye optic model with head and eye rotations to project the detailed reconstruction of the digital environment and retinal features onto the corneal surface for comparison. By quantifying the spatial location of objects in the visual scene and their motion throughout the behavior, they showed that the prey image consistently falls within a small area of the vestibular ocular reflex (VOR) stabilized visual field, coinciding with the region of minimal optic flow and minimal motion-induced image-blur. This functional focus lies in the upper-temporal part of the retina and coincides with the reported high-density region of Alpha-ON sustained retinal ganglion cells. The researchers aim to measure what part of the visual field mice use during prey capture.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is responsible for membrane protein biogenesis in eukaryotic cells, a complex and failure-prone process. The ER membrane protein complex (EMC), consisting of eight subunits, is a central player in this process, but its mechanisms are not well understood. Recent studies have shown that the EMC has multifunctionality beyond its initial insertion of N- or C-terminal helices. The architecture of EMC enables its diverse functions in membrane protein biogenesis. The study developed approaches to produce EMC for structure determination and broad mutational analysis. The high-resolution cryo-EM structures of yeast EMC and two conformations of the human EMC structure revealed a path for transmembrane helix insertion into the membrane, along with regions of importance for all three client types probed. The study enabled a broad survey of the EMC's conserved architecture, with variations between the structures pointing to conformational and compositional differences.
Two recently reported mutations in the TRPM3 gene have been linked to intellectual disability and epilepsy in humans. Researchers have found that both mutations cause the TRPM3 channel to become overactive but via different mechanisms. The Val to Met substitution in the S4-S5 loop induced a larger increase in basal activity and agonist sensitivity at room temperature compared to the Pro to Gln substitution in the extracellular segment of S6. On the other hand, heat activation was increased more by the S6 mutation than by the S4-S5 segment mutation. Both mutants were inhibited by the TRPM3 antagonist primidone, suggesting a potential therapeutic intervention to treat this disease. The study used patch-clamp electrophysiology and intracellular calcium measurements to test the functional effects of the mutations.
Researchers have developed a new synthetic biology approach to producing artemisinic acid, the main ingredient in treatments for malaria, in tobacco plants. The process, known as Combinatorial Supertransformation of Transplastomic Recipient Lines (COSTREL), involves introducing the core pathway of artemisinic acid biosynthesis into the chloroplast genome of tobacco plants, which are then supertransformed with enzymes that affect the artemisinin pathway. The plants were then screened to find those that produced more than 120mg of artemisinic acid per kg of biomass. The technique could provide a cheaper, renewable and easily scalable source of the compound for making malaria treatments.
Researchers have used ultra-high field 7 Tesla (7T) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to map the cortical and perceptual responses to intraneural microstimulation (INMS) of single mechanoreceptive afferent units in humans. By comparing activations to those produced by applying vibrotactile stimulation to the unit’s receptive field and analysing unit-type perceptual reports, they found that INMS and vibrotactile stimulation engage overlapping areas within the topographically appropriate digit representation in the primary somatosensory cortex. They also found additional brain regions in bilateral secondary somatosensory cortex, premotor cortex, primary motor cortex, insula, posterior parietal cortex and contralateral prefrontal cortex are activated in response to INMS. This combination opens up opportunities to bridge the gap between first-order mechanoreceptive afferent input codes and their spatial, dynamic and perceptual representations in human cortex.
A study investigated whether Eurasian jays can integrate multiple social cues to protect their caches from being pilfered. Previous research suggested that these birds respond to cues correlating with the perspective and current desire of a potential pilferer. However, across five experiments, the results showed little evidence that Eurasian jays adjusted their caching behavior in line with these cues. The study has raised questions about the reliability of previous findings and highlighted issues affecting reliability in comparative cognition research. Investigating how non-human animals integrate different social cues may help identify mechanisms of varying complexity that operate in the absence of language and may feed into uniquely human social cognition. Corvids represent a good model for this line of research because they might be capable of responding independently to social cues correlating with different types of mental states. However, the study suggested that comparative psychologists may overlook a crucial aspect of social cognitive complexity by focusing on non-human animals' ability to respond to a single social cue at a time.
Researchers have discovered that starving yeast causes a drop in intracellular pH, leading an enzyme in the cell glutamine synthetase (Gln1) to form filaments that deactivate the enzyme. Filament formation occurs through repeated stacking of homo-decameric enzyme complexes, forming enzyme storage depots. Filament formation is a mechanism that inactivates and stores key metabolic enzymes as a response to an energy-depleted cellular state. The findings also suggest that filament formation is a general mechanism for yeast to endure and recover from severe starvation conditions. Filament formation is an adaptation in the face of nutritional stress, where the metabolism and the physical organization of a cell function. They can be categorized into two distinct groups: liquid-like assemblies, which are disordered and dynamic, and crystalline assemblies, which are more ordered and static. The distinctive properties of these assemblies also entail different geometries; liquid-like assemblies are usually spherical, whereas crystalline assemblies adopt a broader variety of shapes, ranging from linear polymers and two-dimensional polymer sheets to extensively cross-linked three-dimensional crystals.
The study explores the genetic variants responsible for human height and how they function at the biological level. Using a technique called ATAC-seq, the researchers profiled the epigenetic landscape of mouse femoral growth plates to identify open chromatin regions that are enriched with height-associated genetic variants. They found that these open chromatin regions are enriched near genes that code for proteins involved in cartilage formation and are involved in chondrocyte biology. Finally, at specific GWAS loci, they identified the regulatory mechanisms by which they function.
The movement of synaptic vesicles (SVs) in nerve terminals is necessary for the maintenance of neurotransmission. This study used fluorescent imaging to track the movement of SVs in giant calyceal and hippocampal synaptic terminals. The study found that SVs in giant calyceal terminals had faster movement, longer duration and more heterogeneous kinetics compared to small hippocampal terminals. The mobility of SVs was reduced in morphologically mature giant calyceal terminals. The study also found that vesicles expressing vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (VGLUT1) showed higher mobility than those expressing VGLUT2. Disrupting the microtubule (MT) network reduced the movement of SVs in the synapse, and synaptic stimulation did not increase SV mobility. Overall, the study revealed that the type of nerve terminal, the localization of vesicles within a terminal, and the molecular composition of vesicles all play a role in SV dynamics and movements in central synapses.
The document focuses on the challenge of understanding how regulatory systems convert input signals to appropriate outputs in gene transcription. The study presents a quantitative model of even skipped (eve) stripes 2 and 3+7 in the fly embryo, explaining how transcription factor (TF) concentrations define eve’s spatial expression without the need for pairwise interactions or cross-regulatory dynamics. The study accurately predicts the effects of perturbations, including TF mutations and misexpression, and suggests new potential regulators. The approach takes minimal assumptions about regulatory function and helps understand transcriptional control. The Virtual Embryo is used to train and test the models. The study proposes models of transcriptional control that can predict target gene expression accurately given only TF concentrations at cellular resolution.
The document discusses a study which examined the neurobiological mechanisms underlying internally-guided learning when no external rewards or feedback are provided. Participants who successfully understood the meaning of new words without external guidance showed enhanced fMRI signals within the dopaminergic midbrain, hippocampus, and ventral striatum. New words that were better remembered showed increased activation and enhanced functional connectivity between these areas. Emotion-related physiological measures and pleasantness ratings during encoding were associated with remembered new words after 24 hours and seven days. The study suggests that positive monitoring of correct learning can promote the storage of new information in long-term memory via the activation of the SN/VTA-Hippocampal loop, possibly via dopaminergic modulation of the midbrain.
Researchers have identified a mechanism by which excessive vascular leakage in eye diseases such as age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy can be suppressed without the side-effects of existing treatments. The studies on mouse models showed that targeting signalling downstream of VEGFR2 pY949 (a site on the VEGFA receptor) can reduce vascular permeability, accompanied by reduced pathological neoangiogenesis in oxygen-induced retinopathy. It was found that phosphorylation of a specific residue on the VE-cadherin molecule is selectively associated with excessive vascular leakage, and targeting this could suppress edema without affecting other VEGF functions.
The Fluc family of proteins are used by microorganisms and plants to counteract the toxic effects of fluoride ions. These proteins form open anion channels with high selectivity for fluoride over other anions, and are constructed as a dimer of homologous or identical subunits arranged in an inverted-topology. The channels are highly F- selective, with single-molecule turnover of approximately 107 F- ions/sec at -200mV. Fluc runs as a homodimer, forming unprecedented dual-topology assembly in ion channels, and is reminiscent of the inverted repeats found within membrane transport proteins.
Researchers have discovered a novel mechanism at work in cells, which sees the diffusion of molecules through the cytoplasm dramatically reduced during periods of glucose starvation, reducing the movement of both chromatin in the nucleus and mRNPs in the cytoplasm. The discovery explains how cells respond to environmental stresses and will be of interest to doctors researching how to treat diseases most effectively.
The role of Ddb1, a component of the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex, was studied in stem and progenitor cell maintenance and differentiation. The deletion of Ddb1 leads to abrogation of both adult and fetal hematopoiesis, targeting specific progenitor subsets. Ddb1 silencing leads to significant effects on cell cycle progression and rapid apoptosis through the activation of the Trp53 pathway. Conversely, depletion of Ddb1 in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) leads to differentiation and negative effects on cell cycle and apoptosis. The CUL4-DDB1 complex is a novel regulator of stem and progenitor cell homeostasis. Ddb1 deletion leads to cytopenia and neonatal lethality, confirming that Ddb1 expression is absolutely required for fetal hematopoiesis.
This study aims to understand the dynamics of herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) shedding in the genital tract of infected individuals. It was found that viral loads fluctuate rapidly and unpredictably over days and expand and decay rapidly over hours. The study also revealed that HSV-2 reactivation occurs simultaneously in multiple regions across the genital tract, and that the virus is present across the entire genital tract during many episodes. The findings indicate extremely rapid virological growth and containment at multiple contemporaneous sites within genital epithelium. HSV-2 shedding in the genital tract is characterized by intermittent frequent episodes of variable duration and viral load.
The document discusses a study conducted on healthcare workers (HCWs) in a UK teaching hospital to screen for asymptomatic COVID-19 cases. 1032 asymptomatic HCWs were screened over a three week period and 3% tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Clusters of HCW infection were discovered on two independent wards. The study highlights the importance of comprehensive screening for protecting patients and hospital staff as national capacities for implementation of widespread testing have diverged considerably. Challenges to the roll-out of an expanded screening programme for asymptomatic, as well as symptomatic HCWs, include the ability to increase diagnostic testing capacity, logistical issues affecting sampling and turnaround times and concerns about workforce depletion should substantial numbers of staff test positive.
This study aimed to investigate whether neural responses previously linked to affect sharing could result from the perception of salient affective displays, and how the brain network involved in affect sharing and self-other distinction underpinned response to a pain that is either perceived as genuine or pretended. The findings revealed stronger activations in regions associated with affect sharing as well as with affective self-other distinction in participants watching video clips of genuine vs pretended facial expressions of pain. Differences in the engagement of the right supramarginal gyrus and distinct patterns of effective connectivity with anterior insula and anterior mid-cingulate cortex were related to self-other distinction, and thus explained different empathic responses between genuine and pretended pain. Genuine pain resulted in higher self-oriented unpleasantness ratings, alongside higher other-oriented pain ratings. In contrast, pretended pain resulted in down-regulated neural responses to avoid inappropriate affect sharing and social support. The findings suggest that observing others in pain engages neural responses aligning with those coding for the affective component of self-experienced pain, with the anterior insula and anterior mid-cingulate cortex being two key areas in which such an alignment has been detected.
People with diabetes mellitus (DM) are at increased risk for pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) and adverse treatment outcomes. There is a characteristic hyper-inflammatory state in those with concurrent TB and DM (TBDM) at baseline, but little is known about the impact of TB treatment on this pattern. A longitudinal assessment of plasma cytokine and growth factor levels was conducted in cohorts of Indian and Brazilian pulmonary TB patients with and without DM. The results showed that TBDM individuals had higher levels of circulating pro-inflammatory mediators compared to TB individuals at baseline, and this systemic hyper-inflammatory state persisted through the course of TB treatment with a temporal shift in relative IL-10 levels. Non-resolving systemic inflammation in TBDM comorbidity could reflect delayed lesion sterilization or non-resolving sterile inflammation, which are unfavorable long-term outcomes including risk for recurrent TB and for damaging immune pathology.
A comprehensive nationwide blood donation-transfusion database called SCANDAT3-S was used to investigate the associations between blood group and disease. The study included data from 5.1 million individuals and modeled outcomes for 1217 disease categories. The study found 49 associations between a disease and blood group ABO and 1 association between a disease and RhD blood group after adjustment for multiple testing. New associations were found such as a decreased risk of kidney stones and blood group B as compared to blood group O. The study also expanded previous knowledge on associations such as pregnancy-induced hypertension and blood groups A and AB. The study generates strong support for previously known associations and indicates new interesting relations. The study is nationally complete since 1995, but information dates back to 1968 with various levels of completeness, mainly depending on the geographical region.
The article discusses the process of replisome assembly, which is necessary for cells to copy their genetic material during cell division. This involves the loading of hexameric helicases onto replication origins with the help of AAA+ ATPases. The article focuses on how a phage protein called 77 ORF104 interferes with the function of the Staphylococcus aureus replicative helicase loader, DnaI. The viral protein binds to the loader's AAA+ ATPase domain, allowing binding of the host replicative helicase but impeding loader self-assembly and ATPase activity. The article also discusses the structure of the SaDnaIAAA+•77ORF104 complex and how the phage inhibitor binds directly to the ATPase fold of DnaI. This interaction is independent of nucleotide. The article concludes that the findings establish a new approach by which viruses can hijack host replication processes and explain how loader activity is internally regulated to prevent aberrant auto-association.
This document discusses the importance of plant diversity in ecosystems and the role of genetic diversity within plant species in determining community structure. The study specifically focuses on the wild tobacco plant Nicotiana attenuata and how genetic alterations to specific defense traits affect community-level interactions with herbivores and their predators. The document highlights the need for improved genetic tools to identify genes responsible for structuring specific aspects of ecological communities and how this understanding can aid in maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services as human population growth and agricultural resource use increase. Overall, the study provides insight into the potentially large effects of intraspecific genetic diversity on ecological community composition.
The document describes a study in which single-cell RNA sequencing was used to create a cell atlas of the retina of the domestic chicken. The study identified 136 different cell types and 14 developmental intermediates in the retina. Additionally, the study developed a method for using CRISPR-based integration of reporters into selectively expressed genes to assess the morphology of molecularly defined cell types. The study also analyzed relationships between the chick, mouse and primate retinal cell classes and types. The results provide a foundation for anatomical, physiological, evolutionary and developmental studies of the avian visual system.
The number of genes encoding immunomodulatory CD33rSiglecs and maximum lifespan in mammals are significantly correlated, suggesting that CD33rSiglecs have evolved in mammals to manage oxidative stress during inflammation, ultimately extending lifespan. Mice lacking Siglec-E, the main member of the CD33rSiglec family, exhibit reduced survival and develop exaggerated signs of aging at the molecular, structural, and cognitive level due to an unbalanced ROS metabolism and secondary impairment in detoxification of reactive molecules leading to increased damage to cellular DNA, proteins, and lipids. The CD33rSiglecs are capable of modulating cellular inflammatory responses and their expansion in mammalian species has co-evolved with the extension of lifespan. Expanding knowledge of this regulatory process might provide access to measures for alleviating and controlling conditions associated with aging.
Autophagy is a process that recycles damaged or unwanted cellular components and has been linked to plant immunity. In a recent study, the autophagic machinery was found to target the virulence factor βC1 of the Cotton leaf curl Multan virus (CLCuMuV) for degradation through its interaction with the key autophagy protein ATG8, leading to the conclusion that autophagy plays a critical role in antiviral immunity in plants. Autophagy positively regulates plant defense responses against necrotrophic pathogens and contributes to HR cell death as well as restricting the spread of programmed cell death beyond the initial infection site of pathogens. BCHP and TOMMY DREAMER are RNA silencing and resistance gene-mediated resistance mechanisms respectively employed by plants to combat plant pathogens.
A study by researchers at the University of Cambridge and the Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology has found that a protein called ID4 is key to regulating neural stem cell quiescence, or dormancy. The research, conducted in mice, also found that stem cells in the hippocampus continue to produce the pro-activation factor Ascl1 regardless of their state, whether in a quiescent or active cycle. When ID4 is absent, the stem cells enter into a cycle of abnormal activation. The researchers suggest that ID4 is essential to avoiding the accumulation of genetic and metabolic damage in stem cells, which can result in stem cell exhaustion and a loss of functionality.

NetPyNE is a software tool that allows for the development of data-driven multiscale network models in NEURON. It separates model parameters from implementation code, provides a standardized declarative language for connectivity rules, and enables efficient parallelized simulations, parameter optimization, and visualization and analysis. This tool facilitates the integration and interpretation of experimental data at multiple scales and is accessible to a wider range of users in the neuroscience community. NetPyNE streamlines the modeling workflow, accelerating the iteration between modeling and experiment.
Extracellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (eNAD+) has been found to play a significant role in plant immune defenses, acting as an endogenous signaling molecule. While animals are able to process eNAD+ using a range of ectoenzymes and receptors, plants lack the equivalent, and until now the identity of a plant-based eNAD+ receptor remained elusive. In a study led by the Chinese Academy of Sciences, researchers employed a reverse genetic approach to identify eNAD+ receptors in Arabidopsis. They found that a lectin receptor kinase (LecRK) called LecRK-I.8, represented a potential eNAD+ receptor, acting to enhance Arabidopsis’s response to NAD+ and demonstrating a positive role in basal immunity. In a microarray experiment monitoring NAD+ induced transcriptome changes in wild-type Col-0 plants, over 2155 genes were upregulated, with many involved in plant immune responses.
A novel framework has been developed to forecast the genetic composition of future seasonal influenza populations using genotypic and phenotypic fitness estimates. The framework integrates phenotypic measures of antigenic drift and functional constraint with previously published sequence-only fitness estimates. The best models integrate estimates of both functional constraint and either antigenic drift phenotypes or recent population growth. The approach was applied to HA sequence data shared via the GISAID EpiFlu database and HI and FRA titer data shared by WHO GISRS Collaborating Centers. HI phenotypes enable more accurate long-term forecasts of H3N2 populations compared to previous metrics based on epitope mutations alone. Composite models based on phenotypic measures of antigenic drift and genotypic measures of functional constraint consistently outperform any fitness models based on individual genotypic or phenotypic metrics. The framework can accurately estimate the evolution of simulated populations, but the fitness of simulated strains was dominated by purifying selection and only weakly affected by a linear effect of positive selection at epitope.
Shadow enhancers, groups of seemingly redundant enhancers found in many organisms, are critical for robust developmental patterning. However, their mechanism of action is unknown. The authors propose that shadow enhancers drive consistent expression levels by buffering upstream noise through a separation of transcription factor (TF) inputs at the individual enhancers. They measured the transcriptional dynamics of several Kruppel shadow enhancer configurations in live Drosophila embryos and found that individual member enhancers act largely independently. Their results suggest the widespread use of shadow enhancers is partially due to their noise-suppressing ability. The first evidence that transcription occurred in bursts, as opposed to as a smooth, continuous process, was observed in Drosophila embryos. These bursts of transcriptional activity, separated by periods of relative silence, have important implications for cellular function. The authors propose that shadow enhancers may be another mechanism by which developmental systems manage noise. They hypothesize that this separation of inputs allows shadow enhancers to buffer against fluctuations in upstream TF levels to drive more consistent expression levels. They also constructed a simple mathematical model to describe the system and found that TF fluctuations are necessary to reproduce the correlated activity of identical enhancers in the same nucleus.
Researchers have developed peptides that complement the α-sheet conformation observed in some amyloid proteins, and inhibit aggregation in two different amyloid systems. The α-sheet conformation is thought to be involved in the early stages of protein aggregation, and is the structure present in toxic oligomers, which are responsible for cellular toxicity in amyloid diseases. The designed α-sheet peptides preferentially bind species from solutions enriched in the toxic conformer compared with non-aggregated, non-toxic species or mature fibrils. This discovery paves the way for novel therapeutics and diagnostics in over 40 different human amyloid diseases.
The document describes the role of human phospholipase C-γ isozymes in controlling diverse biological processes such as chemotaxis, platelet aggregation, and adaptive immunity. Aberrant activation of PLC-γ1 and PLC-γ2 has been linked to inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer. The document highlights the importance of phosphorylation-dependent enzyme activation and the need to understand the molecular mechanisms that control them. The document presents the first high-resolution structure of a full-length PLC-γ isozyme and provides a detailed model of their membrane-dependent regulation. Additionally, the document discusses the different domains present in the PLC-γ isozymes and how they contribute to autoinhibition and activation. The document also highlights the importance of understanding the context in which these isozymes are activated, especially in diseases such as leukemia, lymphomas, and Alzheimer's disease.
The article discusses the role of plasma membrane domains in cellular signaling, specifically in B cell receptor (BCR) activation. The article presents evidence for the existence of ordered and disordered domains in the plasma membrane of mouse B lymphoma cells using super-resolution fluorescence localization microscopy. The authors demonstrate that clustered BCR resides within ordered phase-like domains that sort key regulators of BCR activation, and propose a predictive model in which clustering receptors leads to their collective activation by stabilizing an extended ordered domain. The findings suggest that the collective protein-lipid and lipid-lipid interactions responsible for the stabilization of an ordered domain around BCR clusters give rise to emergent signaling function by influencing the local biochemical environment of BCRs within clusters. The authors suggest that similar mechanisms may be relevant to other signaling pathways where changes in receptor organization lead to signaling functions.
The communication between neurons is dependent on the regulated release of neurotransmitters. This process involves tethering of synaptic vesicles to presynaptic active zones, priming to a release-ready state, and Ca2+-triggered fusion of the vesicle and plasma membranes. The Ca2+ sensor synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) is a crucial protein in the fusion process, along with the SNAP receptors (SNAREs). Syt1 has two C2 domains (C2A and C2B) and binding of Ca2+ to the C2B domain enables the specific, PIP2-dependent interaction with the plasma membrane, disrupting the interaction with the SNAREs and allowing their cooperation to induce membrane fusion. The primary interface within Syt1's C2B domain is the key site for spatiotemporal regulation of neurotransmitter release, with Ca2+ releasing the interaction enabling the cooperation between the SNAREs and Syt1.
Researchers compared the gene expression patterns and cell lineages in the myogenic B7.5 lineage in the Molgula species with the homologous lineage in Ciona, revealing conserved regulatory gene patterns but cross-species transgenic assays revealed incompatibility of orthologous cis-regulatory sequences between Molgula and Ciona. The unintelligibility is thought to arise from changes in both cis- and trans-acting elements, hinting at regulatory mechanisms' widespread and frequent turnover underlying otherwise conserved aspects of ascidian embryogenesis. Additionally, they discovered a high degree of conservation of the ontogenetic motif, but also uncovered divergent regulatory mechanisms underlying conserved gene expression profiles between Ciona and Molgula. Therefore, in-depth comparative analysis demonstrated a conserved genetic structure but revealed divergent regulatory mechanisms underlying conserved gene expression profiles, impacting the development of identical homologous characters.
Non-methylated islands (NMIs) of DNA, rather than CpG islands (CGIs), are a central and conserved feature of vertebrate gene promoters, according to a new study using non-methylated DNA profiling from 
seven representative example vertebrates. NMIs enable short contiguous regions of non-methylated DNA associated with most human and mouse gene promoters to counteract the repressive effects of DNA methylation on chromatin, and promote a transcriptionally permissive chromatin environment, according to previous research. The study suggests previous comparative methods utilising CGI predictions as proxy for non-methylated DNA require re-evaluation.

Loss of the Drosophila Pngl gene, which encodes an N-glycanase enzyme, causes midgut defects in larvae and abolishes bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) autoregulation in the visceral mesoderm during embryonic development, according to a study in Cell Reports. BMP signalling is required for midgut specification, and pMad staining in Drosophila embryos revealed a decrease in PS3 and PS7 areas in mutant flies. These findings suggest that Pngl is necessary for mesoderm-to-endoderm BMP signalling in Drosophila embryos, and that defects in N-glycanase could cause tissue-specific regulation of the signal pathway. This research provides insight into the molecular mechanisms of N-glycanase regulation of reproductive systems.
The study examines how the signal regulated transcription factors (SRTFs), specifically the Etv family of SRTFs, operate in murine lens development downstream of FGF signaling. The study found that Etv deficiency led to a shift in the transitional zone for lens differentiation as a result of reduced Jag1-Notch signaling, and that Etv proteins suppress mTOR activity by promoting Tsc2 expression, which is necessary for nuclei clearance in mature lens. The study also revealed that Etv and FGF function differently in lens development, demonstrating that these SRTFs can operate outside of the confines of their upstream signaling. The study shows that the Etv family of SRTFs are controlled by FGF-ERK signaling during lens development, and that inactivation of FGF receptors or Etv transcription factors in the lens result in diametrically different outcomes in MAPK signaling. The paper also found that lens differentiation can apparently proceed in the absence of Etv transcription factors.
The synaptonemal complex (SC) is a structure that spans paired homologous chromosomes during meiosis. It is believed that transverse filaments within this structure stabilize chromosome pairing. SC proteins can form polycomplexes, three-dimensional lattices that mimic the periodic structure of SCs but do not associate with chromosomes. Evidence shows that SCs and polycomplexes contain mobile subunits and assemble through weak hydrophobic interactions, characteristic of a liquid crystalline phase. The SC regulates chromosome-wide crossover distribution during meiosis, likely through long-range signal transduction enabled by the unique properties of liquid crystals. The SC is required for normal levels of crossover recombination, cell cycle progression, and chromosome segregation. Evidence from different organisms suggests that the SC may play a direct role in crossover interference, which distributes crossovers along each chromosome in a non-random pattern. SCs assemble between paired axes of meiotic chromosomes and comprise at least four structural proteins that are mutually dependent for their chromosome association. SC proteins fail to assemble between chromosomes if the chromosome axis is disrupted. In the absence of SC assembly, SC proteins form large bodies in the nucleoplasm of meiotic cells, which have a multilaminar internal structure that recapitulates the appearance and dimensions of SCs. Similar structures, known as ‘polycomplexes,’ have been observed in a variety of organisms.
The asexual freshwater planarian is a type of flatworm that challenges the idea of low rates of adult neurogenesis, with its high levels of homeostatic neurogenesis and regenerative capability. Two homeodomain transcription factors, Smed-nkx2.1 and Smed-arx, have been identified as important for the maintenance of cholinergic, GABAergic, and octopaminergic neurons in the planarian central nervous system (CNS), with nkx2.1 expressed broadly throughout the body but present within CNS, and arx expressed in the medial CNS including the anterior brain and ventral nerve cords. Both transcription factors are expressed by neural cell types occupying the VM region of the planarian brain, while expression of both transcription factors was observed within the octopaminergic neuronal subgroup. Knocking down arx resulted in a visible reduction of cholinergic neurons in the VM region of the CNS, while nkx2.1 worms appeared relatively unaffected. This very specific loss of VM cholinergic neurons in arx worms demonstrated that arx was required for the maintenance of VM cholinergic neurons.
Nanoparticulate carbon black (nCB) – a hydrophobic substance produced by the incomplete combustion of organic material, including tobacco – accumulates in human cells in emphysematous lungs and in antigen presenting cells of mice exposed to smoke, according to a study by the University of California. Administered to mice in amounts comparable to human exposures, nCB caused sterile inflammation, induced T helper 17 cell responses and emphysema, which leads to breathing difficulties, suggesting exposure to the substance outside of smoking environments could be a health risk.
This study shows that neurons in the primary motor cortex undergo dynamic range adaptation when monkeys operate a brain-computer interface in both two- and three-dimensional virtual environments. The firing rates of these neurons change in response to changes in the amplitude of their directional tuning curves between the two tasks, similar to the adaptations observed in sensory regions. This suggests that dynamic range adaptation is not limited to sensory regions or to rescaling of monotonic stimulus intensity tuning curves, but may rather represent a canonical feature of neural encoding. The study also discusses how the phenomenon of dynamic range adaptation optimizes the transmission of information about input stimuli within the limited tuning ranges of neurons.
A study has found that the strength of functional connectivity within the "resting motor network" is related to the degree of inhibition in a part of the brain called the primary motor cortex (M1). The researchers combined magnetic resonance spectroscopy and resting-state fMRI and discovered that there is an inverse relationship between levels of GABA (an inhibitory neurotransmitter) within M1 and the strength of functional connectivity across the resting motor network. Anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), an intervention previously shown to decrease GABA levels within M1, was found to increase resting motor network connectivity. The findings imply that fluctuations in the power of oscillations underlie long-range resting functional connectivity.
In this study, researchers describe a kinase-independent function of AKT, a serine-threonine kinase that plays critical roles in growth and metabolism. AKT is aberrantly activated in many human cancers, usually due to mutations in upstream components of the Phosphatidyl-Inositol-3-Kinase (PI3K) pathway. The study found that catalytically inactive AKT protected cancer cells harboring gain-of-function alterations in MET, HER2 or PI3K from drug-induced cell death in a PH-domain dependent manner. The study also found that ATP-competitive AKT inhibitors failed to block the kinase-independent function of AKT, a liability that limits their effectiveness compared to allosteric AKT inhibitors. These findings have important implications for the development of AKT inhibitors for cancer.
The TRPV1 and TRPV2 channels are responsible for detecting noxious stimuli. The gating mechanisms of TRPV2 are poorly understood as selective high affinity ligands are not available. Cryo-EM structures of TRPV1 and TRPV2 reveal they adopt similar structures and identify a putative vanilloid binding pocket near the internal side of TRPV1. This document explains the goal of the present study, which is to confirm the location of the binding site for vanilloids on TRPV1 and to explore whether TRPV2 channels share common gating mechanisms with TRPV1. It goes on to outline the experiments carried out in investigating vanilloid sensitivity in TRPV2, with two mutations proving sufficient to enable vanilloids to bind with high affinity and activate the channel.
Researchers have identified a patch of amino acids on shelterin component Tpz1TPP1 in fission yeast that is essential for recruiting telomerase to telomeres. The TEL-patch-Telomerase interaction is critical for regulated telomere synthesis in cells, and recent studies in humans have revealed that the TEL-patch in the shelterin component TPP1 is essential for recruiting telomerase to telomeres. Dysregulation of telomerase and the subsequent perturbation of telomere length homeostasis leads to a constellation of genetic diseases caused by mutations in the telomere maintenance machinery, referred to as 'telomeropathies'. The researchers found that telomerase action at telomeres requires formation and resolution of an intermediate state, in which the cell cycle-dependent Ccq1-Est1 interaction is coupled to the TEL-patch—Trt1 interaction, to achieve temporally regulated telomerase elongation of telomeres.
The study focuses on understanding the factors involved in and basis of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in KRAS-positive colorectal cancer (CRCs). The study reveals a KRAS-directed pathway associated with ZNF304, a zinc-finger DNA-binding protein, as a crucial factor required for INK4-ARF silencing and CIMP in CRCs. These KRAS-positive human CRC cell lines and tumors demonstrate that ZNF304 recruits a corepressor complex including DNA methyltransferase DNMT1, leading to DNA hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing. The study also considers the relationship between the initiating genetic events responsible for tumorigenesis, including epigenetic alterations in CIMP-positive CRCs. The epigenetic dysregulation of gene expression, transcriptional silencing, and hypermethylation of the DNA thereby initiating and contributing to the development and progression of cancer.
The cytokine IL-12 plays an important role in the generation of terminal effector CD8+ T cells. A study on the Toxoplasma vaccination model shows that IL-12 is essential for the induction of KLRG1 and IFN-γ, and controls the differentiation of nascent effectors. The results reveal that the sequence of differentiative events that culminate in the production of primary end-stage effector CD8+ T cells occurs over a protracted period and that IL-12 exerts regulatory functions at both early and late phases of effector cell generation. Despite the apparent lack of a role for IL-12 in the proliferative recruitment of tgd057-specific CD8+ T cells, IL-12 could play a crucial role in the early diversification of CD8+ T cells into end-stage effector CD8+ T cells vs memory precursor type cells.
The length of the node of Ranvier in myelinated axons can vary greatly within an axon and between axons. The variation in node length can affect conduction speed by up to 20%, similar to changes in myelin thickness or internode length. The adjustment of node length is a potentially energy-efficient and rapid mechanism for tuning the arrival time of information in the central nervous system. Variability in node length is observed in both white and gray matter, with greater heterogeneity in the gray matter suggesting the potential for individual axon conduction speed tuning. Simulation of action potential propagation in myelinated axons shows that varying node lengths can affect conduction speed.
A study has found that Pseudomonas aeruginosa divides into two physiologically distinct subpopulations of cells after adhering to a surface. One subpopulation has high levels of the signaling molecule cyclic diguanylate monophosphate (c-di-GMP) and produces biofilm matrix, while the other has low levels of c-di-GMP and engages in surface motility. The study used a plasmid-based, transcriptional reporter of intracellular c-di-GMP to follow the downstream fate of cells producing varying levels of c-di-GMP in response to surface attachment. The study also found that the subpopulation with high c-di-GMP levels produces more exopolysaccharide than its low c-di-GMP counterpart. These findings suggest that P. aeruginosa engages in a division of labor after surface attachment, accelerating early biofilm formation and surface exploration.
The tumor suppressor gene p53 prevents cell transformation and is often lost in various cancers. However, inhibition of the neighboring gene FXR1 in cancer cells with homozygous deletion of both TP53 and FXR2 shows promise in preventing cell growth. FXR1 has essential RNA-binding functions and regulates transcription, making it a potential therapeutic target for TP53-deleted cancers. The collateral lethality concept suggests that deletion of bystander genes can make cancer cells vulnerable to inhibition of remaining essential genes in the family, without affecting wild-type cells. This study suggests that FXR1 inhibition is a potential treatment option for TP53 and FXR2 homozygous co-deletion cancers.
The study explores the relationship between group size and movement patterns of vulturine guineafowl. The results show a quadratic relationship between group size and movement characteristics, with intermediate-sized groups exhibiting the largest home-range size and greater variation in space use. These groups also had higher reproductive success, but having more young in the group reduced home-range size. The study suggests the presence of an optimal group size and composition for collective movement. The findings highlight how movement behavior affects how individuals encounter resources critical for their fitness.
Researchers have identified a locus on mouse chromosome 10 that accounts for 60% of the genetic variance in methamphetamine intake in mice. They have identified the trace amine-associated receptor 1 (Taar1) gene as the strongest candidate and regulated the mu-opioid receptor 1 (Oprm1) gene as another contributor. Taar1 genotype plays a major impact on methamphetamine consumption, accounting for as much as 60% of the genetic variance. They have used CRISPR-Cas9 technology to replace the Taar1m1J allele found in high line mice with the Taar1+ allele, creating a knock-in with functional TAAR1. The knock-in mice showed reduced methamphetamine intake and a hypothermic response to methamphetamine, which did not occur in control mice. Researchers encourage the investigation of the contribution of Taar1 and Oprm1 variants to human methamphetamine addiction.
A flexible, simple modelling tool has been created that helps users to define their local situation; epidemiology and local unit costs of tuberculosis (TB) diagnosis and treatment are incorporated into a combined decision analysis-transmission framework to project outcomes for nine diagnostic strategies. The models provide locally relevant estimates of cost and impact under alternative implementation strategies, supporting decision makers in determining which tests to deploy in order to treat patients diagnosed with TB.
DIPPER is a comprehensive proteomic resource for studying the spatiotemporal proteome of the intervertebral disc (IVD) in youth, ageing, and degeneration. The IVD is crucial for stability, mobility, and flexibility of the human spine. DIPPER comprises 94 genome-wide measurements from lumbar disc components of 17 individuals, including high-resolution static spatial proteomes, dynamic proteome, and transcriptome. The data, findings, and methodology can be accessed on a web interface and will be valuable references in the field of IVD biology and proteomic analytics. The study established a high-resolution point-reference map of static spatial proteomes along the lateral and anteroposterior directions of IVDs at three lumbar levels. They discovered modules containing specific sets of proteins that describe the directional trends of a young IVD and the deconstruction of these modules with ageing and degeneration. The team also identified proteins predictive of tissue hydration as indicated by high-resolution MRI of the aged discs.
The decline in sexual behavior of aging male C. elegans worms is linked to an increase in excitability of the neural circuitry that controls copulation. The maintenance of functional durability of the mating circuit depends on the metabolic regulator SIR-2.1, a NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase. The decline in mating behavior is due to premature hyperexcitability of cholinergic circuits used for intromission and ejaculation in sir-2.1 null males, and this hyperexcitability is aggravated by the occurrence of reactive oxygen species (ROS). It is suggested that sirtuin proteins mediate an oxidative stress response by regulating antioxidant gene expression through transcriptional factors, which could be involved in age-related diseases such as type II diabetes and neurodegenerative diseases. Transient starvation of young males can extend their mating span. SIR-2.1 is required in multiple tissues to maintain male mating.
The perichromosomal compartment is a poorly-characterized compartment that coats the chromosome periphery during open mitosis. In a recent study, it was found that the nucleolar protein Ki-67 is required for the assembly of this compartment in human cells. The study reveals that Ki-67 is involved in the phospho-regulation of the nucleolar protein B23/nucleophosmin and nucleolin, NIFK, and four novel chromosome periphery proteins cannot associate with the periphery of human chromosomes without Ki-67. The study suggests that Ki-67 is required for targeting of nucleolar proteins to the chromosome periphery in mitosis. Interestingly, loss of the perichromosomal layer does not compromise the condensed morphology or intrinsic structure of mitotic chromosomes but results in significant changes in nucleolar morphology and nuclear organization in the following interphase. Ki-67 is one of the earliest proteins to bind the perichromosomal layer in mitosis and it is predominantly localised in the cortex and dense fibrillar components of the nucleolus during interphase. Furthermore, Ki-67 is recognised as a marker to assess cell proliferation. Finally, the study shows that Ki-67 is a cell-cycle regulated protein phosphatase 1-binding protein that helps in the organization of nucleolar chromatin during interphase in proliferating cells.
This study aimed to understand the role of parvalbumin-expressing (PV+) GABAergic neurons in two forms of experience-dependent modification of primary visual cortex (V1) in adult mice: ocular dominance (OD) plasticity resulting from monocular deprivation and stimulus-selective response potentiation (SRP) resulting from enriched visual experience. The study found that PV+ inhibitory neurons in V1 play a critical role in the expression of SRP and its behavioral correlate of familiarity recognition, but not in the expression of OD plasticity. Furthermore, NMDA receptors expressed within PV+ cells, reversibly inhibited by the psychotomimetic drug ketamine, play a critical role in SRP, but not in the induction or expression of adult OD plasticity.
The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway is a mechanism that destabilizes mRNAs and degrades abnormal mRNAs containing premature termination codons. Loss of core NMD genes, Upf1 or Upf2, is lethal in most organisms, indicating that NMD regulation of mRNA stability is critical for viability. However, the specific genes responsible for inducing lethality in NMD mutants have been unclear. In this study, the authors performed an unbiased genetic suppressor screen and found that Gadd45, an endogenous NMD target, is the primary factor inducing NMD mutant lethality, primarily via increased MEKK1 activity. Strikingly, elimination or reduction of Gadd45 rescues cell survival defects associated with NMD knockdown. The authors also found that excess Gadd45 accounts for ectopic cell death in NMD mutant tissues. These findings suggest that the surveillance of abnormal mRNAs by NMD is not necessarily required for viability, but instead degradation of Gadd45 mRNA is the essential NMD function.
Friedreich's Ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a loss of Frataxin (FXN). Previous studies proposed that the loss of FXN causes mitochondrial dysfunction, which causes neurons to die due to elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, new research has identified a ROS-independent mechanism that contributes to neurodegeneration. The loss of Frataxin homolog (fh) in Drosophila leads to iron toxicity, which induces sphingolipid synthesis and activates 3-phosphoinositide dependent protein kinase-1 (Pdk1) and myocyte enhancer factor-2 (Mef2). The study suggests that an iron/sphingolipid/Pdk1/Mef2 pathway may play a role in FRDA. The research also discovered that FH is required for iron-sulfur cluster assembly and that ETC Complex I activity is severely reduced in fh mutants resulting in impaired mitochondria and energy production.
Muscles have a remarkable ability to maintain synaptic strength in response to changes in muscle cell excitability. This is achieved through a complex interplay between pre- and post-synaptic events that occur in response to changes in calcium levels. By studying cholinergic transmission in Xenopus and mouse cultures, researchers have identified two identified calcium signals that constantly sense synaptic events and their ability to elicit spikes, triggering retrograde signals that control presynaptic neurotransmitter release, resulting in synaptic potentiation or depression. The opposing positive and negative signals are dynamically balanced to adjust neurotransmitter release to match current muscle cell excitability, ensuring that the neuromuscular synapse maintains a remarkable fidelity of execution.
This study investigated the role of scaffolding protein ZO1 in electrical synapses, which rely on neuronal gap junctions containing channels constructed by Connexins. Using model electrical synapses in zebrafish Mauthner cells, the study demonstrated that ZO1 is required for robust synaptic Connexin localization and that disrupting this hierarchical ZO1/Connexin relationship abolishes electrical transmission and disrupts Mauthner cell-initiated escape responses. The study found that ZO1 is asymmetrically localized exclusively postsynaptically at neuronal contacts where it functions to assemble intercellular channels, revealing an unanticipated complexity of molecular and functional organization at electrical synapses.
Researchers have used iCLIP and HyperTRIBE techniques to identify the specific mRNA targets of the Arabidopsis YTH domain protein ECT2. The study found that ECT2 binds to RR(m6A)CH, which is the canonical m6A consensus site in eukaryotes. Pyrimidine-rich motifs are enriched around, but not at m6A sites, and URUAY-type motifs are enriched at ECT2 crosslink sites, suggesting their function is to compete for binding with ECT2 and as yet unidentified RNA-binding proteins. The study provides new insight into the mode of RNA recognition by YTH domain-containing proteins and clarifies principles underlying mRNA recognition by ECT2.
The role of pericentromeric satellite DNA, often considered "junk" DNA, in encapsulating eukaryotic genomes within a single nucleus has been unknown. However, a new study shows that satellite DNA is a critical constituent of chromosomes and that the multi-AT-hook satellite DNA-binding proteins D1 in Drosophila melanogaster and HMGA1 in mice play a conserved role in bundling pericentromeric satellite DNA from heterologous chromosomes into cytological associations called chromocenters. The study found that defective chromocenter formation leads to micronuclei formation, DNA damage, and cell death. The study proposes satellite DNA and chromocenters serve a fundamental role in encapsulating the full complement of the genome within a single nucleus, a universal characteristic of eukaryotic cells.
A new study published in eLife has found that magnesium ions (Mg2+) play a crucial role in mammalian health and growth, with the hormone-regulating ion channel TRPM6 responsible for maintaining organismal balance across both prenatal development and postnatal life. The study found that Trpm6 expression is specific to the placental labyrinth and yolk sac, and that Trpm6 activity in the placenta and yolk sac is essential for embryonic development. In adult mice, TRPM6 is required in the intestine to maintain organismal Mg2+ balance, but is dispensable in the kidney. Trpm6 inactivation in adult mice leads to a shortened lifespan, growth deficit and metabolic alterations indicative of impaired energy balance. Dietary Mg2+ supplementation not only rescues all phenotypes displayed by Trpm6-deficient adult mice, but also may extend the lifespan of wild-type mice as Mg2+ deficiency is a surprisingly common condition in humans.
This study investigates the principles of cerebellar learning through the use of monkey smooth pursuit eye movements. A circuit-level model is used to link behavioral data to neural implementation. The study identifies four principles of cerebellar learning: early acquisition driven by climbing fiber inputs, learned responses guiding transfer from cortex to deep cerebellar nuclei, functional differences in neural signals, and negative feedback limiting learning. Results also suggest short-term motor learning occurs through the parallel fiber to Purkinje cell synapse, driven by climbing fiber responses. Longer-term learning may occur through the deep cerebellar nucleus. The study also characterizes the dependence of single-trial learning on the magnitude of the error imposed in the learning trial, as well as the stability of short-term pursuit learning across trials. The generalization of learning is used to reveal the functional properties of signals that undergo plasticity.
Researchers have developed a Drosophila model of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) caused by a dominant mutation in human β-cardiac myosin heavy chain. The team investigated the effects of the mutation on the function of Drosophila muscle at the biochemical, physiological and mechanical levels. They found that the mutation altered at least two rate constants of the cross-bridge cycle, resulting in increased myosin attachment to actin and decreased detachment, which caused prolonged binding. This led to increased isometric force generation, but also resistive force and work absorption during cyclical contractions, resulting in decreased work, power output, flight ability and degeneration of flight muscle sarcomere morphology. The mutation caused hyperdynamic contractile properties that resulted in diastolic dysfunction. The researchers suggest that screening mutated Drosophila hearts could identify hypertrophic cardiomyopathy alleles rapidly.
The article outlines a study which evaluates the use of Tenofovir gel as a preventative measure against HIV transmission during unprotected vaginal or anal sex. The study found that after seven days of treatment, Tenofovir 1% gel had broad-ranging effects on the mucosa which were more pronounced than those of the detergent nonoxynol-9. Tenofovir suppressed anti-inflammatory mediators, increased T-cell densities, caused mitochondrial dysfunction, altered regulatory pathways of cell differentiation and survival and stimulated epithelial cell proliferation. The study also found that the safety of Tenofovir over longer-term topical use should be carefully monitored.
Angiomotin (AMOT) has been identified as a protein that binds to both NEDD4L and HIV-1 Gag, and that functions in HIV-1 assembly and release. The cellular protein plays a role in completing immature virion assembly before ESCRT-mediated virus budding. HIV-1 Gag lacks a PPXY motif and therefore was thought to not bind directly to NEDD4L until this new research found that AMOT can bind both, leading to the conclusion that the AMOT-NEDD4L interaction can help stimulate virus budding. The discovery of AMOT as a
The Drosophila airway tree is made up of two types of cells: multipotent adult precursor cells (P-fate) and more differentiated cells (D-fate). The GATA-family transcription factor Grain promotes the P-fate and the POU-homeobox transcription factor Ventral veinless stimulates the D-fate. Signaling pathways and negative regulators are involved in the specification of these cells. The local concentrations of Decapentaplegic/BMP, Wingless/Wnt, and Hedgehog signals regulate the expression of D-factors and P-factors. The P-fate is established in a narrow cord called the spiracular branch (SB) and remains multipotent to later generate many parts of the airway. The D-fate cells extend six primary branches and supply oxygen directly to the target cells. The proximal cells express rho and btl/dFGFR and the distal cells express mAb2A12 and UPD. The origin of the proximo-distal organization of the airway tree is due to the local concentrations of repressing and activating signals.
The budding of tubular organs from flat epithelial sheets is a crucial morphogenetic process, and cell behaviors that drive such processes are only starting to be unraveled. Using live-imaging and novel morphometric methods, the study reveals that in addition to apical constriction, radially oriented directional intercalation of cells plays a major contribution to early stages of invagination of the salivary gland tube in the Drosophila embryo. The study demonstrates that tube budding involves radially patterned pools of apical myosin, medial as well as junctional, and radially patterned 3D-cell behaviors, with a close mechanical interplay between invagination and intercalation.
The molecular architecture of mitotic chromosomes is not well understood, despite being one of the first cell biological structures to be described. In this study, researchers have developed a biophysical model of a nucleosome chain (the size of a budding yeast chromosome) constrained by interactions between binding sites of the chromosomal condensin complex, a key component of interphase and mitotic chromosomes. By comparing computational and experimental interaction maps, the researchers were able to predict a mode of condensin action, identifying stochastic condensin-mediated pairwise interactions along the nucleosome chain as generating native-like chromosome features, recapitulating chromosome compaction, and individualization during mitotic condensation. Furthermore, they found that basic assumptions about chromatin behaviour can explain chromosome architecture and generate a molecular model of what the inside of a chromosome is likely to look like.
Condensin complexes are essential for chromosome architecture, but their role in mitotic chromosome assembly remains unknown. Scientists have used acute inactivation approaches and live-cell imaging in Drosophila embryos to dissect the role of condensin I in the maintenance of mitotic chromosome structure with unprecedented temporal resolution. Removal of condensin I from pre-established chromosomes results in rapid disassembly of centromeric regions. While wild-type metaphase chromosomes display residual levels of catenations, upon timely removal of condensin I, chromosomes present high levels of de novo Topoisomerase II-dependent re-entanglements, and complete failure in chromosome segregation. At the heart of these structural changes are the condensin complexes. Condensin complexes are composed of two structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) proteins bridged by a kleisin subunit. The multiple phenotypes observed on mitotic chromosomes upon depletion of condensin complexes raise the possibility that these complexes may have distinct roles at different times of mitosis.
A new DMSP lyase enzyme, DddX, has been discovered that catalyses the conversion of DMSP to DMS via a two-step reaction. DddX belongs to the acyl-CoA synthetase superfamily and is distinct from the eight other known DMSP lyases. DddX is found in several Alphaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, and Firmicutes, suggesting that this new DMSP lyase may play an overlooked role in DMSP/DMS cycles. DMSP is an abundant and ubiquitous organosulfur molecule in marine environments with important roles in global sulfur and nutrient cycling. The organosulfur molecule DMSP also has important roles in global sulfur and nutrient cycling. DMSP can function as an antioxidant, predator deterrent, cryoprotectant and attractant, and may enhance the production of quorum-sensing molecules. DMSP can be taken up and catabolized as a carbon and/or sulfur source by diverse microbes, particularly bacteria. The new enzyme was found in bacteria cultured from Antarctic samples.
Researchers have found that the C-terminal Src kinase (Csk), which is the primary negative regulator of Src-family kinases (SFK), plays a crucial role in controlling basal and induced receptor signalling. The role of Csk in T cell antigen receptor (TCR) signalling has, however, remained unclear. A study reveals that Csk activity plays a crucial role in setting the TCR activation threshold and affinity recognition. By controlling the amount of active Lck, Csk regulates the TCR signalling threshold and affinity recognition. Even at low levels of Csk inhibition, T cell activation by weak agonists is greatly increased. The findings underline that Csk plays an important role in TCR signal initiation, propagation and termination.
The study explores the role of TATA-binding protein associated factor 7L (TAF7L) in regulating the differentiation of brown adipose tissue (BAT) and muscle lineages. The researchers found that TAF7L-containing TFIID complexes associate with PPARγ to mediate DNA looping between distal enhancers and core promoter elements, thereby promoting long-range chromatin interactions during BAT lineage specification. The study also includes details on the methodology used to establish adipocyte cell lines, gene expression analysis, immunoblotting, and chromatin conformation capture assay. The findings suggest that TAF7L is an important molecular switch that regulates the differentiation of brown fat and muscle lineages.  Overall, the study contributes to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in metabolic homeostasis.
A new study has investigated neuroanatomical predictors for trajectories of future alcohol use among 1814 healthy adolescents. The study used a novel voxel-wise whole-brain structural equation modeling framework to predict changes in alcohol use scores over five years. Higher grey matter volumes in the caudate nucleus and left cerebellum at age 14 were predictive of a stronger increase in alcohol use scores over five years. This study is the first to demonstrate the feasibility of running separate voxel-wise structural equation models, opening new avenues for data analysis in brain imaging. The results suggest that preventive measures should focus on the development of alcohol use rather than on drinking habits at the age of 14.
A study published in eLife indicates that mutations that prevent stem cells from producing new bones also causes premature skull fusions in zebrafish, a frequently used research model. Researchers at the Stanford School of Medicine demonstrated that, by muting two genes, they could stop the fish's stem cells from producing new bone. The study also showed that this could be detected before the condition presented itself, opening the way to early intervention. Craniosynostosis occurs in about one in 2,500 births, causing a range of problems with brain growth, damage to brain tissue and even blindness. 
This article provides a compilation of anonymized individual-level datasets of Ebola virus outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo dating back to the first outbreak in 1976. It covers six major outbreaks and one minor outbreak, comprising 996 cases, and provides insight into transmission, clinical features and outcomes. The odds of dying increase with every day a patient is not hospitalized, and outbreaks with initially low reproductive numbers caused longer and larger outbreaks compared with those with higher reproductive numbers. The dataset shows that patients aged 5-15 have a lower odds of dying compared to those over 15, while children under two had a 100% mortality rate. These findings may inform interventions and highlight the importance of rapid national and international response to contain the spread of the virus.
Researchers have created a high-resolution structural description of bacterial chemotactic activity, with potentially wide implications. They have produced a novel reconstitution of receptor signaling using three proteins, yielding a density map of a core-signaling unit obtained through cryo-electron tomography and sub-tomogram averaging. They used this data to computationally construct and refine an atomic model of the core array structure, exploring how various proteins interact, and showed through molecular dynamics simulations a distinctive conformational change in one of the proteins, CheA, which is crucial for chemotactic function. This work helps develop a more detailed understanding of the molecular events involved in chemotactic functioning.
Plant cells use microtubules (MTs) and actin filaments (F-actin) to regulate cell morphogenesis, but the crosstalk between these cytoskeletal systems remains unknown. In this study, researchers investigated the role of kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP) in trichome morphogenesis, a model system for studying cytoskeleton in plant biology. They found that KCBP binds to both MTs and F-actin and that it acts as a non-processive motor to facilitate MT organization. KCBP orchestrates the interplay between MTs and F-actin to assemble the required cytoskeletal configuration for trichome branching, elongation, and tip sharpening. These findings provide insight into the mechanisms of cytoskeletal regulation of cell shape determination in plants.
The hormone estrogen is essential for the development of mammary tissue but is also linked to breast cancer due to its association with genomic instability. This study shows that increased levels of estrogen lead to a significant increase in the formation of R-loops, co-transcriptional RNA-DNA products, which can cause DNA damage. The study also found that E2-induced R-loop formation and breast cancer rearrangements are highly enriched at E2-responsive genomic loci, and E2 induces DNA replication-dependent double-strand breaks (DSBs), many of which are R-loop dependent. The research suggests that the uncontrolled proliferation due to E2-driven transcriptional deregulation causes replication stress and DNA damage.
The auditory cortex (AC) sends extensive feedback to nuclei earlier in the auditory pathway, including the inferior colliculus (IC). The mechanisms by which information processing is shaped via the descending feedback pathway remain poorly characterized. The goal of the present study is to examine the role of cortico-collicular projections in shaping sound responses in IC. IC receives glutamatergic inputs from neurons originating predominantly in layer 5 of AC. The study selectively modulated activity in AC, targeting either excitatory projections or inhibitory interneurons, to quantify how AC shapes spontaneous activity and sound-evoked responses in IC. The results showed that activation of excitatory projections, but not inhibition-driven changes in cortical activity, affects collicular sound responses. Furthermore, the broad activation of feedback upregulates the baseline activity of IC neurons but decreases tone-evoked response.
Cholesterol not only plays a permissive role but also an instructive one, as it can activate signalling via the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, a cell communication system. Cholesterol can activate Smoothened, an orphan G protein-coupled receptor, via its cysteine-rich domain. Cholesterol influences Hh signalling and plays a role in the modulating the function of cell-surface receptors. In the Hedgehog pathway, an acute increase in plasma membrane cholesterol can activate Hh signalling. The study found that cholesterol must be the active ingredient in the MβCD complexes that activate Hh signalling. Steroidal analogs were tested and were found to require the tetracyclic nucleus to be active in the Hedgehog signalling pathway.
Researchers have discovered a novel membrane structure that may play a role in orchestrating the positioning of centrosomes during cell division in ascidian embryos. The structure, which invaginates from the posterior side of the cell towards the centre, appears to be responsible for the posterior positioning of the centrosome and the subsequent orientation of the division axis. The study also suggests that the centrosome contributes to cilia formation and, therefore, in turn an important process for tissue morphogenesis and cell fate determination.
A new study has identified a protein named tripartite motif protein 23 (TRIM23) as playing a crucial role in the transition from early to late adipogenic enhanceosomes in the process of adipocyte differentiation. TRIM23 was found to stabilize PPARγ protein, which is a master regulator of adipogenesis, and was observed to mediate atypical polyubiquitin conjugation. Knocking down TRIM23 caused PPARγ protein abundance to decrease, resulting in a severe defect in late adipogenic differentiation, while not affecting the formation of early enhanceosomes. TRIM23 was found to be necessary for the efficient conversion of preadipocytes to mature adipocytes. The study has identified TRIM23 as a new factor that can be targeted to improve adipocyte differentiation or to treat related diseases.
The process of meiotic recombination, which generates genetic variation in sexually-reproducing organisms, is directed to the genome through two mechanisms - PRDM9 binding and promoter-like features. This study identifies PRDM9 orthologs in 225 species and shows that rapid evolution of its predicted binding affinity occurs in taxa carrying the complete ortholog of PRDM9. Swordtail fish carrying only a partial but conserved ortholog share recombination properties with PRDM9 knock-outs. The evolution of PRDM9 ZF is fastest in the mouse and human genomes. The genes in the species that do not use PRDM9 to direct meiotic recombination do not show a rapid evolution of recombination hotspots.
Researchers have explored the effects of genetic variation on gene regulation in mammalian embryos using a hybrid approach to quantify the different types of regulation that occurs during embryonic development. They crossed two mouse strains and found that embryonic expression of 331 genes is dependent on the genotype of the mother, and embryonic genotype controls allele-specific expression of 1594 genes. A marked paucity of trans-eQTL in the embryos suggests that the widespread expression differences do not propagate through the embryonic gene regulatory network. Furthermore, the cis-eQTL genes exhibit lower-than-average evolutionary conservation and are depleted for developmental regulators, consistent with purifying selection acting on the expression phenotype of pattern formation genes. The study reveals unique and important features of gene regulatory architecture during mammalian embryonic development.
Circular RNA is a new discovery in gene expression programs in eukaryotes. The biogenesis of circular RNA involves a non-canonical ‘backsplicing’ event, which has been shown to be facilitated by inverted repeats flanking the circularized exon. However, such sequence elements are rare in lower eukaryotes and some human genes, making current models insufficient to describe circularization. Through systematic splice site mutagenesis and the identification of splicing intermediates, researchers discovered that circular RNA in Schizosaccharomyces pombe is generated through an exon-containing lariat precursor. Furthermore, they discovered that exon size is a significant determinant of RNA circularization. They propose that circularization may proceed through a lariat precursor generated by exon skipping.
Protocadherins are proteins that neurons use to develop and maintain neuronal networks. They are involved in cell adhesion in the nervous system of higher animals and comprise about 70% of the cadherin superfamily in mammals. These proteins are divided into two groups: clustered (expressed from a large gene cluster) and non-clustered. Clustered protocadherins are further divided into alpha, beta, and gamma subfamilies. They play roles in neuronal survival, dendritic arborization, and self-avoidance during neuronal connectivity. Non-clustered protocadherins play key roles in neuronal development, such as germ layer differentiation and cell sorting during gastrulation. These proteins control these phenotypes through homophilic interactions of their extracellular cadherin (EC) repeat domains. The EC1-4 antiparallel homodimer is a general interaction strategy that evolved before the divergence of these distinct protocadherin families. The different Pcdh subfamilies may function independently or cooperatively depending on the brain region and/or neuronal cell type. The article discusses in detail the structure and sequence comparisons of alpha, beta and gamma clustered Pcdh isoforms, and illustrates how subfamilies encode specificity in distinct ways through diversification of loop region structure and composition in EC2 and EC3.
The crystal structure of the nuclear import receptor Importin-9 bound to its cargo, histones H2A-H2B, has been reported. The interface between Imp9 and H2A-H2B suggests that NLS-like sequences in the histone tails have a minor role in import. Imp9 acts as a storage chaperone for H2A-H2B while escorting it to the nucleus and also sequesters it from DNA. The RanGTP does not dissociate Imp9•H2A-H2
The zebrafish lateral line system is known for its ability to regenerate hair cells following damage, with support cells serving as progenitors for new hair cells. This study identified distinct support cell populations with different progenitor identities and demonstrated that these populations are independently regulated by Notch signaling. Targeted ablation of support cells reduced the number of regenerated hair cells and progenitors regenerated even in the absence of hair cell damage. The study also found evidence of proliferation-mediated replenishment of hair cell progenitors by support cells in the neuromast, but new hair cells also arose from a pool of progenitors not strictly defined by their proliferation history. Finally, the study showed that different support cell populations contributed to hair cell development and turnover under homeostatic conditions and to hair cell regeneration following damage.
The study focuses on the control of self-renewal and differentiation of neural stem and progenitor cells, particularly in Drosophila type II neuroblast lineages. It demonstrates that the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling Brahma (Brm) complex and Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) function cooperatively with another transcription factor, Earmuff (Erm), to suppress the formation of ectopic type II neuroblasts. The study also examines the role of various chromatin-remodeler genes in preventing ectopic neuroblast formation in Drosophila larval brains, and how these genes interact with one another to prevent INP dedifferentiation back into neuroblasts.
The document proposes a new strategy for vector control programs using the concept of evolution. The strategy aims to generate new control tools by combining a high-toxicity insecticide with a candidate repellent. This will increase the efficacy of the repellent against the target vector population and in turn protect the insecticide against the spread of insecticide resistance. The effectiveness of the strategy is theoretically achievable, effective and sustainable, and can be explored using models that consider vector population genetics and disease transmission probabilities. The model predicts the spread of the deflection and resistance alleles and their impact on the vector population. The new strategy offers a consistent, evolutionarily sustainable, “double-dip” system of disease control combining mortality and repellence.
The document discusses the organization and development of sarcomeres, which are the force-producing mini-machines found in all striated muscles of bilaterians. The study used Drosophila flight muscles as a model system to investigate the biogenesis and maturation of sarcomeres. The researchers generated a transcriptomics resource of developing Drosophila flight muscles, identified 40 distinct expression profile clusters, and found that most sarcomeric components group in two clusters, which are strongly induced after all myofibrils have been assembled, indicating a transcriptional transition during myofibrillogenesis. The efficient induction of the transcriptional transition during myofibrillogenesis requires the transcriptional regulator Spalt major. As a consequence of Spalt knockdown, sarcomere maturation is defective and fibers fail to gain stretch-sensitivity. Together, these findings indicate that precise transcriptional control of the sarcomeric components enables their ordered assembly into sarcomeres and their maturation to pseudo-crystalline regularity.
In a study of mouse models of genital herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections, researchers found that sustained type I interferon signaling is a key driver of pathogenic neutrophil responses and identified neutrophil- and type I interferon-dependent IL-18 production as a novel driver of inflammation during genital HSV-2 infection. Neutrophils, a critical component of the innate immune system, play a pathogenic role during viral infections, particularly in genital herpes infection. The study demonstrated that neutrophils promote genital inflammation with minimal impact on viral burden and recruitment of other immune cells to the vagina. The study aims to identify the factors that drive pathogenic versus non-pathogenic neutrophil responses during viral infections, particularly in HSV infections.
The Malassezia species of fungi exhibit variation in chromosome number, ranging from six to nine chromosomes. The mechanisms driving this variation were investigated in this study, which identified eight centromeres in M. sympodialis and confirmed centromeres in related species with seven, eight or nine chromosomes. It was found that two distinct mechanisms are involved in centromere loss from an ancestral nine-chromosome state: chromosome breakage followed by loss of centromere DNA and centromere inactivation accompanied by changes in DNA sequence following chromosome-chromosome fusion. The researchers propose that AT-rich centromeres drive karyotype diversity in the Malassezia species complex through breakage and inactivation. The findings shed light on the evolution of the Malassezia species complex and the mechanisms behind chromosome number variation in fungi.
Non-coding mutations may be responsible for driving cancer development, but detecting them is challenging due to the varying mutation rate and uncertainty of functional impact. Researchers have developed a statistical method called ncdDetect that takes into account long-range mutation rate variation, position-specific impact measures, and sample-specific mutational signatures to screen non-coding regulatory regions of protein-coding genes for potential driver mutations. The researchers used ncdDetect to identify new candidates for non-coding driver mutations and found that the presence of non-coding mutations was associated with altered expression or decreased patient survival across an independent pan-cancer sample set. This suggests that ncdDetect may be an effective tool for identifying non-coding cancer driver elements.
Heterotypic cooperation, where two distinct populations exchange benefits that are costly to produce, is vulnerable to cheaters who exploit benefits without contributing. Positive assortment mechanisms such as partner choice and partner fidelity feedback can stabilise cooperation. In this study, the researchers examined how partner fidelity feedback enables heterotypic cooperation between microbes to be protected against cheaters in a spatial environment. Using engineered yeast strains and mathematical models, they found that self-organization automatically grants cooperators instead of cheaters more access to heterotypic cooperative partners, thus excluding cheaters without evolving recognition mechanisms. A spatial environment can promote heterotypic cooperation, but it may also intensify competition, potentially encouraging cheating strategies.
During endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, mRNA cleavage reactions are performed by the enzyme Ire1α to increase the ER folding capacity. Researchers have discovered that Ire1α forms a complex with the Sec61 translocon and that a hydrophobic region in the XBP1u protein mimics a transmembrane domain, which makes it co-translational captured by the signal recognition particle (SRP). The SRP bound XBP1u-ribosome nascent chain is then delivered to the Sec61 translocon where its mRNA engages with Ire1α. This interaction ensures efficient cleavage of ER-targeted mRNAs during ER stress conditions. Mutations in Ire1α that disrupt its association with the Sec61 translocon lead to reduced Ire1α-mediated cleavage of ER-targeted mRNAs. The researchers also discovered that the interaction between the Sec61 translocon and Ire1α may facilitate Ire1α's access to regulated Ire1-dependent decay (RIDD) mRNA substrates.
A new study has discovered that the reason for an increase in the number of aneuploid eggs, which is the leading cause of pregnancy loss and Down’s syndrome, is largely due to an age-related increase in the separation of sister kinetochores in oocytes. As women age, the sister kinetochores of each chromosome become un-unified so that they function as a single kinetochore. However, with advancing age this separation increases, rotated bivalents and merotelic attachments increase, chromosome arm cohesion weakens, increasing the number of univalent chromosomes that will result in aneuploid eggs. The research analysed over 200 live and fixed human oocytes from donors aged between 23 and 46 years to investigate whether age-related changes in chromosome architecture contribute to the maternal age effect in human oocytes.
Bacterial biofilm formation is an adaptation strategy in response to changing environments that involves stable surface adhesion of cells. This process is regulated by the Lap system and the second messenger cyclic-di-GMP in Pseudomonas fluorescens. The Lap system, which is broadly relevant for cyclic-di-GMP and HAMP domain-regulated transmembrane signaling, translates changes in cytoplasmic levels of cyclic-di-GMP into cell-surface events via an inside-out signaling mechanism that ultimately controls cell adhesion. Understanding the molecular basis of biofilm formation, maintenance and dispersal is crucial for identifying novel targets that could potentially be used for disrupting bacterial aggregates. The Lap system is one of the best-understood c-di-GMP signaling systems to date and is a potent model system to study mechanistic questions.
Researchers have developed an optogenetic method to study the formation of Amyloid-β protein oligomers, which are thought to be a key factor in the development of Alzheimer's disease. The method uses a fluorescently tagged, light-responsive Amyloid-β peptide that clumps together in the presence of blue light. The researchers used this method to examine the consequences of intracellular Amyloid-β oligomers in living tissues using model organisms including fruit flies, roundworms and zebrafish. They found that Amyloid-β oligomers caused physical damage that led to a catastrophic loss of tissue and was a hallmark of Alzheimer's in humans. The lifespan of these model organisms was also reduced, but the researchers were able to separate the metabolic and physical damage caused by light-induced Amyloid-β oligomerization from Amyloid-β expression alone. The study provides the first model to separate different aspects of Alzheimer's disease progression and offers a tool to help examine the effects of Aβ oligomerization in vivo.
Researchers have identified a key role for the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) in virtual navigation tasks. Mice were trained to perform a virtual navigation task that was driven by visual decisions. The task had the mice indicating the direction of a grating on a wall at the end of a virtual corridor by turning into the left or right arm of the corridor. The mice’s performance was greatly influenced by the contrast of the grating. The researchers measured populations of PPC neurons in the mice while they were completing the virtual navigation task. They found that PPC neurons were selective for specific combinations of the animal's spatial position and heading angle. Individual PPC neurons’ activity and their collective firing patterns in choice-selective sequences closely followed a selectivity for preferred heading. The activity in the PPC was not as strongly related to decision-based outcomes as it was to spatial positions and heading angles.
Calcified abscesses found among the remains of a Byzantine-era woman in a Troy cemetery have revealed the preserved DNA of a severe maternal infection, according to research from the Max Planck Institute. The abscesses contained fodder and human bacteria. Gardnerella vaginalis was identified as falling within contemporary diversity while the Staphylococcus saprophyticus belonged to an ancient lineage that is not generally associated with present-day human disease. It is believed close contact with domesticated animals may have been responsible for the historical variation.
The article discusses how the Lamellipodin (Lpd) protein binds directly to actin filaments, enhances its effect on Vasodilator (Ena/VASP) polymerase activity, and regulates its subcellular localization. The article also discusses the importance of actin filaments in eukaryotic cells and the regulatory molecules that control their assembly. The article provides insight into how growing actin filaments feed back on the polymerases and nucleation promoting factors that regulate their assembly.
A study published in the journal eLife outlined how the light-sensitive plasma membrane, or rhabdomere, of Drosophila photoreceptors undergoes turnover during illumination, which alters their size and composition. However, until now, the mechanism by which illumination is coupled to rhabdomere turnover was unclear. The researchers found that photoreceptors contain a light-dependent phospholipase D (PLD) activity, which is responsible for coordinating endocytosis of rhabdomere membrane with plasma membrane recycling, thus maintaining the plasma membrane's size and composition. The study suggests that PLD is a key regulator of plasma membrane turnover during receptor activation and signaling in photoreceptors.
The Myt1 family of zinc finger transcription factors is important for fibroblast to neuron reprogramming in vitro. In a study published in eLife, researchers found that ztf-11, the sole Myt1 homolog in Caenorhabditis elegans, is required for neurogenesis in multiple neuronal lineages from previously differentiated epithelial cells. Ztf-11 is necessary for the repression of non-neuronal genes and for establishing neuronal identity. It acts downstream of the Hes1 ortholog lin-22 to promote neuronal differentiation. The study suggests that neurogenesis requires both activation of neuronal programs and repression of non-neuronal programs.
New and more sophisticated behaviors emerge after birth with the formation of new synaptic connections in the nervous system. Little is known about how these nascent connections are organized to support new behaviors alongside existing ones. In larval zebrafish, a study was carried out to examine the development of spinal pathways from hindbrain V2a neurons and their role in locomotion. The study found that new projections are continually layered laterally to existing neuropil and give rise to distinct pathways that function in parallel to existing pathways. These chronologically layered pathways have systematically changing properties to support a wide range of behavioral repertoires. The study sheds light on the neural underpinnings of behavior development, and the findings suggest that the chronological layering of parallel circuits with the systematic variation in connectivity patterns and biophysical properties are fundamental attributes of the nervous system that form the basis for an animal's ability to exhibit new and increasingly sophisticated behaviors after birth while maintaining vital reflexive behaviors.
A new chemoptogenetic approach has been developed to target neuronal mitochondria in the intact nervous system in vivo. A chemical fluorogen, MG2I, produces singlet oxygen when bound to a fluorogen-activating protein (dL5**) and exposed to far-red light. Transgenic zebrafish expressing dL5** within neuronal mitochondria showed neurobehavioral deficits caused by neuronal bioenergetic crisis and acute neuronal depolarization. Remaining cellular ultrastructure was preserved initially but cellular pathology downstream of mitochondrial damage eventually culminated in neuronal death. This approach provides powerful new chemoptogenetic tools for investigating mitochondrial homeostasis and pathophysiology and shows a direct relationship between mitochondrial function, neuronal biogenetics, and whole-animal behavior. The study has significant implications for understanding mitochondrial function, bioenergetics, and homeostasis in neurons.
Non-linear waves that cause spiral wave rotations to occur are important in biological systems, but manipulating their cores to control them has remained a theory with little evidence. However, a new study has now demonstrated real-time spatiotemporal control over spiral wave dynamics by capturing a spiral wave and dragging it along a predefined pathway of illumination, referred to as Attract-Anchor-Drag-based (AAD) control. Optogenetics, where light is used to create spatially and temporally predefined heterogeneities, was used to manipulate the spatial location of a stable spiral wave core. By doing so, the researchers were able to terminate complex spiral wave activity, which has wide-ranging benefits including possible restoration of normal wave propagation in the heart.
This article discusses the role of TNFα signaling in vascular endothelial cells and the use of a three-dimensional microvessels-on-a-chip model to study the response of bioactive lipids to TNFα. Bioactive lipids, including prostaglandins, isoprostanes, lysophosphatidic acid, sphingolipids, and platelet activating factor, are key mediators of inflammatory processes in endothelial cells. Traditional two-dimensional endothelial cell cultures display a pro-inflammatory phenotype, complicating the assessment of inflammatory processes. The microvessels-on-a-chip model provides a more physiological environment and displays a more dynamic and less inflammatory response to TNFα. The study highlights the potential for this model to provide a better understanding of the impact of oxidative stress on the human vascular endothelium and to identify specific targets for inflammatory diseases affecting the vasculature.
This study shows that activation of telomerase, an enzyme that elongates telomeres at the ends of chromosomes, may be an effective treatment for pulmonary fibrosis, a fatal lung disease associated with short telomeres. The study used a mouse model of the disease, induced by damage to the lungs and short telomeres, and treated with telomerase gene therapy via adeno-associated vectors (AAV9-Tert). The therapy resulted in improved lung function, reduced inflammation and fibrosis, longer telomeres, and increased proliferation of regenerative alveolar type II cells. These findings suggest that telomerase activation may be a promising treatment strategy for pulmonary fibrosis associated with short telomeres in humans.
Researchers have discovered a new activity of the protein AID (activation-induced cytidine deaminase) that leads to rearrangements of sequence repeats via homologous recombination, resulting in deletions between direct repeats. AID has previously been known to initiate various types of B cell-specific immunoglobulin gene diversification, including somatic hypermutation, gene conversion, and class switch recombination. The new findings suggest that AID has a broader target mutagenic potential and establish a novel system to study induced homologous recombination in vertebrate cells. The study used chromosomally integrated fluorescence reporter transgenes in chicken B-cell lines and a murine B cell line. The high frequency of repeat recombination suggested DNA end resection before strand invasion, and analysis of recombinants between homeologous repeats yielded evidence for heteroduplex formation and preferential migration of the Holliday junctions to the boundaries of sequence homology.
The protein Rgs12 plays a role in regulating cell differentiation, specifically bone remodeling and osteoclastogenesis. Researchers found that mice with the Rgs12 gene deleted exhibited an osteopetrotic phenotype with increased bone mass and fewer osteoclasts. Conversely, overexpression of Rgs12 led to increased osteoclast formation and bone resorption activity. Proteomics analysis showed that Rgs12 deletion resulted in upregulated antioxidant enzymes under the transcriptional regulation of Nrf2, a transcription factor that regulates redox balance. Rgs12 was found to suppress Nrf2 activity and facilitate the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in osteoclasts, which are critical signaling molecules for osteoclast differentiation. The findings have implications for understanding the molecular pathways involved in osteoporosis and for developing new treatments to target these pathways.
Researchers have found that IK1 channels do not mediate the sAHP in pyramidal neurons, despite previous research suggesting a possible link. The team examined the sensitivity of the sAHP in hippocampal area CA1 and the basolateral amygdala to TRAM-34, but found no evidence that it affected either the current underlying the sAHP or excitability of CA1 or basolateral amygdala pyramidal neurons. The researchers suggest that their findings are in opposition to a previous report that identified IK1 (KCNN4) as the sAHP channel in CA1 pyramidal neurons. The results of the study provide new evidence that could help researchers better understand the role that calcium-activated potassium channels play in the activity of pyramidal neurons, which are found in areas of the brain that are important for learning and memory.
The U1 snRNP plays an important role in the removal of introns from pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA). This article presents two crystal structures of engineered U1 sub-structures, which reveal in detail the processes and interactions of U1 snRNP recognition of pre-mRNA. The zinc-finger of U1-C interacts with the duplex between pre-mRNA and the 5′-end of U1 snRNA. The structure has been used to measure the intrinsic affinity of recombinant U1 snRNP for various 5′SS sequences, which allows for better understanding of the role played by the U1 snRNP in the recognition of pre-mRNA.
Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) are enzymes that convert ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides, which are essential for DNA replication and repair. In humans, RNR is comprised of α and β subunits, with the α subunit containing the active site and the β subunit housing the radical cofactor. Cryo-electron microscopy has been used to determine the near-atomic structure of a dATP-inhibited state of human RNR. This structure has three α2 units arranged in an α6 ring, providing insight into the molecular basis for CDP recognition by allosteric specificity effectors dATP/ATP. The study also presents lower-resolution EM structures of human α6 in the presence of both the anticancer drug clofarabine triphosphate and β2, supporting a model for RNR inhibition in which β2 is excluded from binding in a radical transfer competent position when α exists as a stable hexamer. The study highlights the importance of RNR in maintaining appropriate concentrations and proportions of deoxyribonucleotides for genome maintenance, and the use of RNR-targeting drugs for cancer treatment.
Researchers have identified the Spok gene family as the basis for the seven spore killer types (Psks) found in Podospora anserina, a fungus with multiple spore-killing alleles. The combination of Spok genes at different chromosomal locations defines the spore killer types and creates a killing hierarchy within a population. Two novel Spok homologs were also identified located within a 74-167 kbp region (the Spok block) that resides in different chromosomal locations in different strains. The SPOK protein performs both killing and resistance functions and these activities are dependent on distinct domains. The prevalence of meiotic drivers (which can create conflict within the genome) in nature is probably underestimated, and intragenomic conflict is predicted by theory to spur an arms race between the genome and the elements and to act as a major driver of evolutionary change. Most drivers that have been described exhibit large shifts in frequencies in both time and space.
The document discusses the challenges of mapping polyclonal antibody responses and presents a new approach using both mutational antigenic profiling and electron microscopy polyclonal epitope mapping to map the specificities of the neutralizing and binding antibodies of polyclonal anti-HIV-1 sera from rabbits immunized with BG505 Env SOSIP trimers. The study identifies dominant neutralizing specificities and more diverse binding specificities, as well as differences between binding and neutralization due to antigenicity differences between virus and soluble Env trimer. The study provides a holistic view of the binding and neutralizing specificity of polyclonal sera and suggests refinements in residue-level epitope specificity directly from sera as possible.
The drug rapamycin has been shown to increase lifespan and delay age-related dysfunction in both rodents and humans. However, the optimal dose, duration, and mechanisms of action are still unclear. A study found that a three-month treatment of 8mg/kg of rapamycin in middle-aged male mice increased life expectancy by up to 60% and improved healthspan. The treatment was also associated with a remodeling of the microbiome, including an increased prevalence of segmented filamentous bacteria in the small intestine. However, a similar treatment showed a lack of lifespan extension in female mice and was associated with an increase in aggressive hematopoietic cancers. The study suggests that a short-term rapamycin treatment late in life could delay aging and modulate the microbiome in male mice, but the dose and duration need to be further studied in both sexes with regards to cancer prevalence and side effects.
The FcγRIIb-SHIP2 axis is critical in the development of tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease, according to a study published in eLife. Amyloid-β (Aβ)-containing extracellular plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau-loaded intracellular neurofibrillary tangles are neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease, and while Aβ exerts neuropathogenic activity through tau, the mechanistic link between Aβ and tau pathology remains unknown. Here, the study showed that FcγRIIb-SHIP2 axis links Aβ neurotoxicity to tau pathology by dysregulating PtdIns (3, 4) P2 metabolism.
NG2+ glia or polydendrocytes are a new entity among glial cell populations in the central nervous system, and their complete repertoire of roles is not yet identified. They originate from Nkx2.1+ progenitors in the ventral telencephalon and populate the entire dorsal telencephalon from E12.5 to E16.5, coinciding with the establishment of the blood vessel network. They are closely apposed to developing cerebral vessels, either positioned at the sprouting tip cells or tethered along the vessel walls. The absence of NG2+ glia drastically affects vascular development leading to a severe reduction in ramifications and connections. This study provides new insights into the mechanisms involved in brain angiogenesis and implies that transient NG2+ glia work together with macrophages in guiding vessels.
The ability to maintain and predict rhythmic movements is crucial for many tasks, but the neuronal mechanisms involved in this process are not yet fully understood. In a study with nonhuman primates, researchers trained the primates to maintain the rhythm of a visual metronome, then recorded neural activity in the supplementary motor area. They found that this area exhibited rhythmic bursts of gamma band activity that matched the internal tempo of the rhythm and increased in amplitude throughout the trial, providing an estimate of total elapsed time. Additionally, the timing of these bursts and firing rate modulations allowed the researchers to predict whether the primates were ahead or behind the correct tempo. These results indicate that the supplementary motor area uses dynamic motor plans to encode a metronome for rhythms and a stopwatch for total elapsed time.
The formation of veins in plants is an expression of tissue cell polarity coordination and is controlled differently than in animals. A prevailing hypothesis is that GNOM, a regulator of membrane trafficking, positions auxin transporters to coordinate tissue cell polarity and induce vein formation. However, new evidence shows that vein formation occurs independently of these transporters and that a GNOM-dependent signal coordinates tissue cell polarity and induces vein formation upstream of both auxin transport and signaling. These findings suggest the existence of PM-PIN-independent auxin transport pathways with vein patterning function. The coordination of tissue cell polarity is a central question in biology, and these findings provide new insights into its mechanisms in plants.
A study using a computational model of latent structure learning to explore how humans learn and represent social group boundaries found that separate areas of the brain are correlated with dyadic similarity and latent structure learning. The researchers used a structure-learning task in which participants reported their own position on a political issue and guessed and learned via feedback the positions of other agents on the same issue. Trial-by-trial estimates of “allyship” were then compared based on dyadic similarity between participants and each agent and latent social group structure-based allyship estimates. The results provide new insights into the psychological and neural mechanisms by which people learn to distinguish “us” from “them” and suggest that distinguishing friend from foe in an increasingly interconnected world is of paramount importance.
This research focuses on the engineering of synthetic networks and the use of cell-free systems to examine complex dynamic biological networks. The current paradigm for characterizing synthetic networks in cells results in lengthy design cycles, minimal data collection, and poor quantitative characterization. Cell-free systems offer an alternative to these limitations, but the challenge is determining whether biological networks behave similarly in cell-free systems and cells. The study shows that cell-free systems accurately emulate cellular environments for the complex dynamic networks tested. The cell-free system allows quick and extensive characterization of biological systems, which is challenging in cells due to limited control over network components and unpredictable interactions with host cell processes.
Neuronal excitability is regulated by desensitization in pentameric ligand-gated ion channels (pLGICs). Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a polyunsaturated fatty acid found in synaptic membranes, enhances agonist-induced transition to the desensitized state in the prokaryotic channel GLIC. The study found that DHA is bound at the channel-periphery near the M4 helix, causing a long-range allosteric effect on the pore across domain-interfaces. This leads to both water and permeant ion loss. These findings provide novel mechanistic details of desensitization in pentameric channels.
Researchers at Duke University Medical Center have created detailed maps of the proteins responsible for identifying and fighting off viral infections. The team used cryo-electron microscopy to create the images, which shows how the proteins assemble into large clusters, all of which mount a robust response to fight viruses. The work could eventually be applied to the creation of new antiviral drugs.
The two mammalian genes, Kcnt1 and Kcnt2, encode Na+-dependent K+ (KNa) channels, which play a critical role in neuronal function. However, understanding of KNa channels has been limited due to a lack of specific tools and methods for rigorous KNa identification in native cells. To further explore the potential physiological roles of KNa currents, the Kcnt1 and Kcnt2 genes were genetically disrupted to generate mouse strains in which Slo2.1, Slo2.2 or both subunits together (Slo2 dKO) were deleted. The study examined the consequences of KNa KO on sensory function and dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron excitability. The results reveal a role of Slo2.2 channels in acute itch sensation, with pruritic stimuli triggering an immediate increase in itch response in Slo2.2 KO mice. The absence of KNa current resulted in an increase in action potential (AP) firing and a decrease in AP threshold, while the activation of KNa current acting as a brake to the first depolarization-elicited AP. The study highlights a new explanation of how cell firing is altered by Slo2.2 channels.
TRIM5α proteins are restriction factors that target the capsid cores of retroviruses and inhibit viral replication. The B-box 2 domain of TRIM5α mediates higher-order assembly of TRIM5 proteins by forming both dimers and trimers. Trimers can link multiple TRIM5α proteins into a hexagonal net that matches the lattice arrangement of capsid subunits and enables avid capsid binding. Higher-order TRIM5α assembly is also reported to promote the E3 ligase activity of the upstream RING domain. The structural basis by which the B-box 2 domain promotes higher-order assembly of TRIM5α dimers has been challenging to decipher. However, artificial constructs known as miniTRIMs have been engineered that allowed researchers to define the molecular details of this process. These miniTRIMs were designed to be monovalent with respect to the RING and B-box 2 domains and to preserve the native quaternary B-box/coiled-coil interface. Crystallographic and functional studies of the TRIM5α B-box 2 domain have provided important molecular details of cellular recognition of retroviruses and how recognition links to downstream processes to disable the
Researchers have developed a modification to the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system that improves its ability to make precise, single-copy edits to cells' DNA. By blocking both 5' ends of long double-stranded DNA fragments with "bulky" molecules like biotin and carbon spacers, the DNA can be shielded from multimerisation and integration via non-homologous end joining. This allows for more efficient use of the DNA repair mechanism, homology-directed repair, which is typically only active during the late S/G2 phase of the cell cycle when cell division occurs. The technique also minimised embryonic lethality that has been observed with existing CRISPR/Cas9 methods.
A combination of next-generation sequencing and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology was used to identify disease-causing mutations in USH2A in a patient with retinitis pigmentosa. The patient’s keratinocytes were reprogrammed into iPSCs, which were then differentiated into multi-layer eyecup-like structures with features of human retinal precursor cells. The inner layer of the eyecups contained photoreceptor precursor cells that expressed photoreceptor markers and exhibited axonemes and basal bodies characteristic of outer segments. Analysis of the USH2A transcripts of these cells revealed that one of the patient’s mutations causes exonification of an intron, a translation frameshift and a premature stop codon. The other mutation causes disease through protein misfolding and ER stress. Transplantation of these cells into mice resulted in the formation of photoreceptor cells, suggesting the mutations act via post-developmental photoreceptor degeneration. This technology provides a means for exploring human retinal pathophysiology and evaluating gene-based and cell-based therapies.
This study investigated the short-term plasticity of the language network in response to controlled virtual lesions. Focal continuous theta-burst stimulation (cTBS) was applied to the left angular gyrus (AG) or neighbouring supramarginal gyrus (SMG) in healthy subjects, and the effects on semantic and phonological tasks were measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The results showed that cTBS over AG decreased task-related semantic activity not only at the stimulated area but in a larger network, including left AG, anterior inferior frontal gyrus (aIFG), and left posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG), indicating a functional double dissociation in task-specific neural activation patterns. However, cTBS over SMG delayed phonological decisions, which was reflected in the suppression of task-related activity in the phonological network. The study provides insights into the adaptive potential of the language network to compensate for lesions and informs models of language reorganization.
The effects of prenatal methadone exposure (PME) on neurobehavioral development in offspring remain unclear. This study aimed to develop a mouse model of PME to investigate its effects on physical development, sensorimotor behavior, and motor neuron properties. Methadone accumulated in the placenta and fetal brain, and offspring showed symptoms and behaviors consistent with neonatal opioid withdrawal. PME impaired offspring physical growth, activity, and sensorimotor milestone acquisition. The study suggests that pregnant women and their fetuses represent a vulnerable population severely impacted by the opioid crisis. Better animal models of prenatal opioid exposure are needed to understand the neurological and behavioral consequences of opioid exposure in the absence of confounding variables.
Exosomes containing micro-RNA's (miRNAs) are released by mutated KRAS colorectal cancer (CRC) cells which can alter the tumour microenvironment, whilst exosomal RNAs contribute to changes in gene expression in recipient cells. miR-10b was selectively increased in wild-type exosomes, while miR-100 was increased in mutant exosomes. Mutant donor cells openly transfer miR-100-target repression in wild-type-recipient cells. miRNA transfer through exosomes suggests new ways in which mutant KRAS may function in CRC. KRAS mutations represent 34-45% of colon cancers; exosomes from mutant KRAS CRC cells were transferred to wild-type cells to induce cell growth and migration. The miRNA profiles from exosomes segregate according to KRAS status suggesting the presence of a mutant KRAS allele alters sorting of specific miRNAs to exosomes. A diverse sub-set of cell and exosomally targeted miRNAs was validated separately by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT/PCR).
The regenerative capacity of damaged hearts varies greatly among species, with efficient heart regeneration occurring in zebrafish. The process of cardiomyocyte proliferation during heart regeneration was investigated using a single-cell RNA-sequencing approach on adult zebrafish hearts. The study found that proliferating border zone cardiomyocytes have distinct transcriptomes compared to the non-proliferating remote cardiomyocytes and resemble embryonic cardiomyocytes. In addition, metabolic reprogramming from mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis was induced by Nrg1/ErbB2 signaling and was important for efficient cardiomyocyte proliferation. This mechanism was found to be conserved in a murine model with Nrg1/ErbB2 induced regeneration. The study also found that border zone cardiomyocytes disassemble sarcomeric structures and re-express markers of embryonic cardiomyocytes, suggesting their dedifferentiation. Finally, the study utilized a single-cell transcriptomics approach to investigate the transcriptional changes occurring during the apparent dedifferentiation process.
Chemotaxis, the means by which motile bacteria sense and respond to changes in local chemical concentration, is initiated by highly organized clusters of chemotaxis signaling proteins, chemosensory arrays, which are commonly found at bacterial cell poles. In Vibrio species, proper positioning of these signaling arrays is mediated by a protein called ParP, which interacts with MCP proteins and the histidine kinase CheA to form the core of these macromolecular complexes. ParP's interaction with MCPs integrates it into the chemotaxis signaling arrays through its C-terminus, stimulating their formation, while its N-terminal interaction domain facilitates its own polar localization and enables polar recruitment of arrays. ParP is a critical regulator for controlling the localization dynamics of its network constituents which drives the localized assembly and stability of these arrays, resulting in proper cell pole development. However, how factors promoting array positioning gain access and integrate into the structure of signaling arrays is not well understood, especially in systems other than E. coli.
Avenolide, a diffusible small molecule microbial hormone, regulates the production of avermectin, used in the treatment of parasitic diseases. A concise synthetic strategy for avenolide was developed, enabling the identification of 90 new actinobacteria regulated by butenolides, which could be exploited for the discovery and production of novel medicines. Crystal structures of the butenolide receptor AvaR1 in isolation and in complex with avenolide, as well as those of AvaR1 bound to an oligonucleotide derived from its operator, were presented, along with the identification of 89 additional putative butenolide receptors. The binding strength of the synthetic avenolide and AvaR1 was found to be Kd = 42.5 nM ± 2.1 nM. The new synthetic strategy significantly reduced the number of steps from prior studies, producing a final yield of 14 mg total from 15 g of starting material. The mechanism of hormone-mediated de-repression was also explored.
The article discusses the role of the mRNA binding protein Egalitarian (Egl) and K10 mRNA cargo in activating dynein-dynactin for mRNA transport on microtubules. Full-length Bicaudal D (BicD) is shown to be auto-inhibited, but when bound to both Egl and K10 mRNA, it is activated and able to recruit two dyneins for faster and longer runs. The activation of the complex by mRNA cargo ensures that only cargo-bound motors are motile. The article also discusses the structural basis for dynein auto-inhibition and the role of cargo adaptor proteins like BicD in activating dynein activity. The authors use electron microscopy to confirm that Egl binds to the BicD loop and that the N-terminal region of Egl binds to BicD, while residues 557-726 of Egl contain a globular exonuclease homology region.
Sphingolipids are important signaling molecules in eukaryotic cells and are tightly regulated, but the mechanisms underlying this regulation are not well understood. A recent study has shed some light on this process by identifying the Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complex as a critical player in sphingolipid homeostasis. GARP deficiency leads to the accumulation of sphingolipid synthesis intermediates, changes in sterol distribution, and lysosomal dysfunction. The study provides mechanistic insights into disease pathogenesis and suggests a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy type 2 (PCCA2). Inhibition of the first step of de novo sphingolipid synthesis is sufficient to mitigate many of the phenotypes of GARP-deficient yeast or mammalian cells.
This research shows how cytonemes, dynamic structures in tissues responsible for the exchange of signaling molecules and their receptors, are regulated by the Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) autocrine signaling pathway. Wnt8a interacts with the receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2, activating the PCP pathway, which induces the formation of cytonemes. These structures then transport Wnt8a to neighboring cells, triggering Wnt/β-catenin-dependent gene transcription and proliferation. The study found evidence that cytoneme-based Wnt transport operates in diverse processes, including zebrafish development, murine intestinal crypt, and human cancer organoids. Dysregulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling has been linked to multiple diseases, and the molecular mechanism for Wnt cytoneme formation illustrates the co-dependent interactions of the different branches of the Wnt signaling pathways.
This study examines the molecular program of the tammar placenta, a type of marsupial, and compares it to eutherian placentation, which is commonly referred to as "placental mammals". The study finds that the tammar placenta shares similarities with eutherian placentation, including both fetal and maternal signals, and that genes for fetal development and nutrient transport are co-opted by both placental and mammary gland cell types to optimize offspring success. The study also finds that tammar milk undergoes dramatic and dynamic changes in protein, carbohydrate, and lipid content to support the remainder of fetal development. The study concludes that marsupials have fully functional placentas and that lactation in marsupials evolved as an alternative to the complex placentation seen in eutherians.
Plants have the ability to inherit traits rooted in their genetic code independently of changes to DNA sequencing through DNA methylation variation. A study of Arabidopsis population of epigenetic recombinant inbred lines (epiRILs) aimed to identify genes responsible for quantitative resistance of the biotrophic downy mildew pathogen Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa). The study identified four epigenetic quantitative trait loci (epiQTLs) on chromosomes I, II, IV and V that do not impact plant growth, resistance to other biotic stresses, or result in physiological costs to plant development. The Hpa-resistant epiRILs demonstrate an ability to activate defence responses at the early stages of infection. This study demonstrates that hypomethylation in pericentromeric regions is significant in providing quantitative disease resistance while DDM1-dependent DNA methylation determines disease resistance by regulating the responsiveness of defence-related genes.
The voltage-sensing domains (VSDs) in voltage-gated ion channels are considered structurally and functionally conserved while energetically coupled to each other, and their topology and structure suggest that both VSDs and pore domain make up modules that can be adapted to different scenarios. The intrinsic gating of the VSD in the absence of the pore domain has been characterized in order to gain insight into the gating mechanisms. A Shaker Kv channel truncated after the fourth transmembrane helix S4 (Shaker-iVSD) showed significantly altered gating kinetics and formed a cation-selective ion channel with a strong preference for protons, developing ion conduction despite an identical primary sequence, indicating an allosteric influence of the pore domain. A direct structural and functional interaction between the VSD and the pore has been shown, but how possible restraint forces from the pore domain may have obscured conformational changes during VSD activation remains unknown. Prolonged depolarization has been shown to reconfigure VSDs into a stable 'relaxed' state, resulting in a hyperpolarizing shift of the voltage dependence of both pore closure and return of the VSD to its resting position. In order to obtain insights into the gating mechanisms of the Shaker potassium channel VSD as an independent structural and functional unit, a Shaker channel pore deletion mutant, the Shaker isolated VSD (Shaker-iVSD), was generated. Gating currents arising from Shaker-iVSD were detected using the cut-open oocyte technique, and the phenotype was consistent with an ion channel, conducting at negative membrane potentials and very slow activation and deactivation kinetics. Shaker-iVSD induced proton-selective inward currents, which increased and shifted E (H+) to more positive potentials when decreasing external pH, consistent with a proton selective pore.
Researchers have developed a technique for electron microscopy that significantly reduces the time required for the investigation of neural circuits. Called ARTEMIS (Assisted Reconstruction Technique for Electron Microscopic Interrogation of Structure), the new method relies on the use of electron-dense tracers that can highlight specific cells within a volume that's fully imaged, thereby speeding up imaging and reconstruction. Sections are treated with a mild reducing agent that increases the tissue's electron density, and the new protocol allows the team to study neural circuit motifs without having to reconstruct the whole neuronal network.

A study has identified a key cellular mechanism that may help prevent fatty liver disease in mammals. The study, conducted on nematode worms, found that germline stem cells (GSCs) play a key role in regulating the transcription factor SKN-1, which helps to maintain lipid homeostasis by promoting stress resistance, enhanced proteasome activity, and the recycling of cellular waste. The research sheds light on how a lack of GSCs can influence ageing and metabolic diseases, and may explain
Under nutrient stress, developing Drosophila exhibit 'organ sparing' by allocating resources to vital organs at the expense of others. In Drosophila, brain sparing is facilitated by a glia-derived growth factor, while arbor growth of somatosensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system is regulated by the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway, which is influenced by nutrient availability, cellular energy levels, and stress factors. The study shows that under nutrient stress, dendrites of somatosensory neurons preferentially grow compared to neighboring non-neural tissues, resulting in dendrite overgrowth. The dendrite growth is initiated by a milder suppression of Tor signaling, muting the induction of autophagy in neurons. The glia-derived Jelly belly (Jeb) ligand mediates protection against nutrient deprivation of larval brain, protecting it against nutrient deprivation and exhibiting continuous neurogenesis.
Dengue viruses are capable of increasing viral titers in humans while maintaining decreased titers and pathogenicity in their reservoir hosts. The dengue virus has a special ability to cleave human STING, reducing type 1 interferon production and boosting viral titers in humans. However, the cleavage of STING is specific to humans and a few closely related ape species. The study found that STING cleavage is critical for susceptibility to dengue virus proteases, and conversion of specific residues renders all nonhuman primate STING proteins sensitive to cleavage. Additionally, mutations at specific positions can cause STING to become resistant or susceptible to cleavage. The study suggests that the ability of dengue viruses to cleave STING is a key factor in their replication and ability to cause disease in humans, but also explains why human dengue viruses are difficult to model in nonhuman primates.
The article discusses the mitochondrial contact site and cristae junction (MICOS) system and the discovery of a new conserved subunit called QIL1. Through systematic proteomic analysis, the depletion of QIL1 disrupted CJ structure in human and Drosophila cells, leading to impaired respiration and increased mitochondrial fragmentation. Loss of QIL1 resulted in MICOS disassembly and the degradation of other subunits. The study concludes that QIL1 is required for CJ integrity, cristae morphology, and mitochondrial function. Understanding the regulation and composition of MICOS is crucial for the understanding of cristae dynamics and maintenance in health and disease.
The article focuses on the molecular mechanisms of post-tetanic potentiation (PTP) in synapses, which is a short-term enhancement of transmitter release. Diacylglycerol (DAG) and protein-kinase C (PKC) signaling in the nerve terminal have been implicated in short-term modulation of transmitter release, but the target protein of PKC phosphorylation during short-term enhancement has remained unknown. Munc18-1, a presynaptic protein essential for membrane fusion, is found to be the critical target protein of PKC phosphorylation during PTP. A dynamic PKC phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation cycle of Munc18-1 drives short-term enhancement of transmitter release during PTP. The presynaptic protein Munc13-1 can also act as a target with the activation of DAG or Ca2+/Calmodulin resulting in increased vesicle priming. PTP is caused by a transient PKC phosphorylation of Munc18-1 that causes the increased transmitter release that underlies it. The article concludes by showing that phosphatases are responsible for the decay of PTP and should be studied more for postsynaptic plasticity mechanisms.
Mitochondrial flashes, or "mitoflashes", may play an essential role in regulating the ATP set-point in the heart, according to researchers from Nanjing Medical University. Mitoflashes negatively regulate ATP production in isolated respiring mitochondria and wax and wane to counteract the ATP supply-demand imbalance caused by superfluous substrate and altered workload in cardiomyocytes. Manipulating mitoflash activity is sufficient to inversely shift the otherwise stable ATP set-point. The researchers suggest that mitoflashes appear to constitute a digital auto-regulator for ATP homeostasis in the heart.
The article discusses the role of the transcription factor FAMA and the Retinoblastoma (RBR) protein in the development of guard cells in the stomatal lineage of Arabidopsis plants. FAMA is a master regulator of guard cell identity, while RBR is involved in both cell cycle control and cell identity maintenance. The researchers demonstrate that FAMA recruits and interacts with RBR to enforce irreversible differentiation of guard cells. Disrupting the interaction between FAMA and RBR leads to failures in terminal differentiation, resulting in reiteration of stomatal lineage divisions and gene expression programs. Understanding the role of FAMA and RBR in the stomatal lineage sheds light on the coordination of iterative divisions and terminal differentiation in plant stem cells.
The mitochondrial IMS protein Mia40 is essential for the oxidation and import of proteins in mitochondria. Mia40 has two functional elements, an N-terminal cysteine-proline-cysteine motif for substrate oxidation and a C-terminal hydrophobic pocket for substrate binding. In this study, yeast mutants were generated to dissect both Mia40 activities genetically and biochemically. Results showed that the substrate-binding domain of Mia40 is both necessary and sufficient to promote protein import, indicating that trapping by Mia40 drives protein translocation. Mia40 predominantly serves as a trans-site receptor of mitochondria that binds incoming proteins via hydrophobic interactions, thereby mediating protein translocation across the outer membrane by a 'holding trap' mechanism. The formation of mixed disulfides of Mia40 with incoming polypeptides was suggested to serve as a crucial reaction in the translocation reaction.
The study investigates the symbiotic relationship between Hydra viridissima and its photosynthetic symbiont, Chlorella sp. A99, identifying key players that control the relationship. Researchers found that symbiosis between Hydra and Chlorella is a codependent partnership in which the exchange of nutrients is the primary driving force. Additionally, they discovered that glutamine temporarily supports in vitro growth of the obligate symbiotic Chlorella. The study presents the first characterization of genetic complementarity between the two organisms that explains the emergence and/or maintenance of a stable symbiosis. Overall, this research sheds light on the molecular mechanisms allowing this partnership to persist over millions of years.
Researchers have developed an optogenetic approach to study the role of bridging fibers in chromosome alignment during metaphase. Bridging fibers are bundles of antiparallel microtubules that link sister kinetochore fibers and balance tension during metaphase. Using the optogenetic approach to acutely remove the protein regulator of cytokinesis 1 (PRC1), which crosslinks bridging fibers, the researchers found that bridging fibers promote chromosome alignment by transmitting length-dependent forces to associated kinetochore fibers. Kif4A and Kif18A, which are kinesins located within the bridging fiber, were found to regulate the overlap length of bridging microtubules. PRC1 removal resulted in partial disassembly of bridging fibers and wider metaphase plate, shorter inter-kinetochore distance, and more frequently appearing lagging chromosomes due to indirect regulation of forces acting on kinetochores. These findings suggest that bridging microtubules buffer chromosome movements, promoting their alignment at the spindle equator, which is critical for proper telophase nuclear reformation.
A study using coarse-grained simulations to investigate the Sec-facilitated membrane integration of EmrE and its mutants on realistic biological timescales has revealed a mechanism for regulating membrane-protein topogenesis, in which initially misintegrated configurations of the proteins undergo post-translational annealing to reach fully integrated multispanning topologies. The proposed mechanism agrees well with the experimentally observed features of EmrE topogenesis and provides a range of experimentally testable predictions regarding the effect of translocon mutations on membrane protein topogenesis. The simulations are in excellent qualitative agreement with the experiments, and the results suggest that the coarse-grained model correctly reproduces the essential molecular features of topogenesis.
Tardigrades, also known as water bears or moss piglets, are small invertebrate animals that can survive extreme conditions thanks to a unique nuclear protein called Dsup (damage suppressor). Dsup protects chromosomal DNA from damage under conditions, such as ionizing radiation or hydrogen peroxide treatment, that generate hydroxyl radicals. A Dsup ortholog from the tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris similarly binds to nucleosomes and protects DNA from hydroxyl radicals. The study of chromatin-associated factors revealed tardigrade-specific protein, termed Dsup, which is a highly charged and largely unstructured nuclear protein that binds to DNA. The presence of Rv Dsup does not inhibit the efficiency of ACF-mediated chromatin assembly and does not substantially alter the structure of chromatin. The H. exemplaris Dsup-like protein was found to have 26.4% amino acid identity with Rv Dsup as well as hydrophobicity and charge profiles that are similar to those of Rv Dsup. The H. exemplaris Dsup-like protein and R. varieornatus Dsup are homologs and have related biochemical functions. The focus of this research is the molecular function of Dsup, a unique protein that directly or indirectly protects DNA under extreme conditions.
Researchers studied how adult female canaries develop vocal skills and regain them after a period of non-use by administering and withdrawing testosterone. They found that once developed, vocal motor skills are retained for an extended period of time, and the neurons in the songbird's premotor nucleus HVC lose significant dendritic spines during the initial testosterone-induced development of vocal skills. A period of vocal practice is required to recover the originally developed patterns in certain song features. Ultimately, the study provides insight into the mechanisms that enable animals to recover motor skills quickly when under environmental time constraints.
A previously unknown subpopulation in the periosteum, identified as cells that express the Sox9 gene, has been shown to orchestrate the regeneration of murine rib bones. These cells require Hedgehog signaling to stimulate neighbouring cells to become skeletal cells with both chondrocyte and osteoblast properties, which allows cartilage callus formation in response to injury. The study indicates that despite only contributing to a subset of callus cells, the Sox9-positive cells play a critical role in large-scale bone regeneration. The research also found that cells within the rib repair callus co-express cartilage and bone markers while displaying either a chondrocyte or osteoblast morphology, indicating a unique hybrid mechanism for large-scale bone repair.
A team of researchers has published the first detailed, high-resolution molecular structure of photosystem I (PSI), the large protein complex in plants that plays a primary role in photosynthesis. Most life forms on Earth survive thanks largely to solar energy harnessed by oxygenic photosynthesis. Oxygenic photosynthesis underpins the survival of virtually all life forms by producing oxygen and assimilating carbon dioxide into organic matter. The process determines, to a large extent, the composition of our atmosphere and provides essential food and fuel. PSI is a protein complex that powers the ATP synthesis that provides energy for plants, and also provides the electrons that reduce carbon dioxide to carbohydrates.
The pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α is known to play a key role in cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration, which is characterized by the progressive depletion of muscle strength. A new study identifies a novel function for retinoblastoma protein (Rb), where Rb causes sarcomeric disorganization. The researchers suggest that Rb disrupts sarcomeric organization in human skeletal muscle myotubes (HSMMs) following its phosphorylation and translocation into the cytoplasm, which is triggered by TNF-α treatment. This leads to the progressive depletion of muscle strength. The study implicates the tumor suppressor protein in the regulation of cytoskeletal organization.
Researchers have identified a specific link between sleep, memory consolidation and the reactivation of dopamine neurons in fruit flies. Through studying how male flies learned courtship behaviour, the scientists discovered that dopamine neurons crucial to short-term memory also play an active role in long-term memory processing, which is consolidated during sleep. The researchers focused on dopamine-releasing neurons, finding that certain neurons are essential during sleep for a fly's consolidation of long-term memory. They revealed that these dopaminergic neurons rely on the activity of certain sleep-promoting neurons in the brain.
This study analyzed the behavior of the Caenorhabditis elegans worm during the different developmental stages of its life cycle. The researchers found that the animal exhibited two distinct behavioral states, active wakefulness and quiet wakefulness, and that there were abrupt switches between these states. The study also investigated the role of the GSA-1 pathway in regulating these switches, and found that increased signaling through this pathway stabilized active wakefulness, while decreased signaling destabilized it. The study used a high-speed, modular image-processing tool called PyCelegans to track the behavior of the worms. The study identified new patterns of modulation of posture and locomotion outside of lethargus, which had not been previously examined.
A study has found that SWELL1 (Lrrc8a) is a molecular mechanosensor that encodes a swell-activated anion channel and regulates PI3K-AKT, ERK1/2, mTOR signaling, muscle differentiation and metabolism in skeletal muscle cells. Skeletal muscle-targeted Lrrc8a knock-out mice have smaller myofibers, generate less force ex vivo and exhibit reduced exercise endurance, associated with increased adiposity under basal conditions, and glucose intolerance and insulin resistance when raised on a high-fat diet, compared to the wild-type mice. The study suggests that LRRC8A connects β1-integrin-mediated mechano-transduction with insulin/IGF1-PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling, regulating skeletal muscle differentiation, function and potentially adiposity and systemic glucose metabolism.
The article discusses the relationship between stress, translation, and the insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling (IIS) pathway. Under conditions of stress, translation is inhibited by proteins 4E-BP and PDCD4 which impair cap-dependent translation. FOXO transcription factors activate 4E-BP expression, further inhibiting translation. The article shows that Drosophila FOXO stimulates the transcription of PDCD4 in response to stress. The article also investigates the resistance of the 5' untranslated regions of growth factor receptors to eIF4A inhibition under stress conditions. The IIS pathway controls gene expression through two different branches: Foxo target genes and m7G-cap-dependent translation through 4E-BP and S6K. The article identifies Drosophila PDCD4 as an additional Foxo target further enhancing the coupling of transcription and translation regulation in the IIS pathway. The article reveals that Foxo binds the PDCD4 gene in the promoter and intronic regions with enrichment values as high as 16-fold over background. The article also identifies the increase in protein synthesis through the activation of the PDCD4 gene by Foxo.
Alfy is a protein involved in protein degradation and has been identified as a molecular scaffold between the ubiquitinated cargo and autophagic machinery. As it is highly expressed during the development of the central nervous system, its role in neurodevelopment was examined by eliminating Alfy expression in mice. The study found that Alfy is required for the formation of axonal tracts throughout the brain and spinal cord, including the formation of the major forebrain commissures. Loss of Alfy disrupts localization of glial guidepost cells and attenuates axon outgrowth in response to Netrin-1, showing the key role of macroautophagy in the developing CNS. This study also found that Alfy is a CNS-enriched protein that is present in various neuronal and non-neuronal cell types in the developing and adult brain. The study concludes that Alfy is essential for postnatal survival and plays a crucial role in establishing neural connectivity in the mammalian brain.
Researchers have discovered a potential genomic stratification tool for treating malignant mesothelioma (MM), a rare cancer known to be fatal. The team found that loss of function of the nuclear deubiquitinase BRCA associated protein-1 (BAP1) correlates with heightened sensitivity to TRAIL (tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand), an anti-cancer agent that has demonstrated limited benefit in trials without a targeting biomarker. BAP1 loss-of-function mutations are frequent in MM, and researchers propose that BAP1 could potentially act as a biomarker for death receptor agonists, suggesting that the findings could offer new hope for the treatment of MM.
The growth and division rates of individual neural stem cells (NSCs) in the brain are unknown. However, researchers have discovered that RNA binding protein Imp plays a role in regulating NSC proliferation rates in Drosophila neuroblasts, leading to increased Myc protein levels, larger neuroblasts, and faster division rates. Declining Imp levels throughout development limit myc mRNA stability to restrain neuroblast growth and division. Imp-dependent regulation of myc mRNA stability fine-tunes individual NSC proliferation rates. Systemic signals such as insulin and ecdysone signaling also drive NSC growth and division, with a particularly strong influence at the transitions between developmental stages.
Researchers have identified the hormone responsible for controlling reproduction in bristle worms as the sesquiterpenoid methylfarnesoate. The function of the hormone is to suppress the expression of the yolk precursor Vitellogenin, preventing a central and costly step of reproductive maturation. These findings challenge current views of animal hormone evolution, as sesquiterpenoids have been assumed to be restricted to arthropods. The hormone is expected to have implications for marine and terrestrial ecosystems, as insecticides targeting this pathway interfere with Platynereis vitellogenesis.
Proteins evolve by adapting their sequence to new environments. The structure of these adaptation routes, known as fitness landscapes, has previously been studied in higher-order spaces but only in small parts of the protein sequence. A new study has now explored more than 160,000 genetic variants of four particular protein sequences in the immunoglobulin-binding protein expressed in Streptococcal bacteria, GB1. The researchers found that while sign epistasis – where a change to one site in the protein was only beneficial if another site was also changed – blocked numerous ways of adaptation, changes that occurred indirectly allowed adaptations to occur. The results suggest that indirect paths alleviate constraints on adaptive protein evolution and that such landscapes could alter previous views of how proteins evolve.

The article discusses the hormonal regulation of lateral gametophore branching in the moss Physcomitrella patens. The researchers found that branches initiate de novo from the epidermis of the gametophore axis and that initiation is usually, but not invariably, acropetal. The formation of lateral branches is regulated by auxin, cytokinin, and strigolactone, which are conserved regulators of land plant sporophyte development. The mode of auxin transport required in branch patterning is different from known sporophytic pathways. The study suggests that three conserved hormonal cues have been recruited independently in evolution to produce a convergent branching morphology, but their co-ordinated action is integrated by different mechanisms to those in flowering plants.
The oral cavity serves as a reservoir for microbial strains which are found in the intestine of healthy individuals, according to research. The study was conducted on over 470 subjects from five countries and demonstrated that certain oral microbes colonise the intestine, and that such microbial transmission is common. While an individual’s mouth and gut contain unique microbiomes, some microbes appear to flow freely along the digestive tract, forming continuous populations which shape the microbiome. Some of the transmission identified related to opportunistic pathogens which can contribute to specific diseases.
HGF/Met signalling has been linked to basal-type breast cancers that arise from progenitor cells in the luminal compartment of mammary epithelium. The study found that ICAM-1 can efficiently mark mammary luminal progenitors, which comprise hormone receptor-positive and receptor-negative cells. Both populations express Met, while HGF is produced by stromal and basal myoepithelial cells. The study found evidence that paracrine Met signalling can control the function of luminal progenitors and modulate their fate. The study examined the development of the mammary gland and found that ICAM-1 expression discriminates the basal and luminal cell compartments, and defines a luminal population highly enriched in clonogenic progenitors.
The thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) has been identified as a source for local, sensory-cortex-specific non-rapid-eye-movement sleep (NREMS) in mice. Neurons in optogenetically identified sensory TRN sectors showed stronger repetitive burst discharge compared to non-sensory TRN cells due to higher activity of the low-threshold Ca2+ channel CaV3.3. Major NREMS rhythms in sensory but not non-sensory cortical areas were regulated in a CaV3.3-dependent manner. The data indicate a previously unrecognized heterogeneity in a powerful forebrain oscillator that contributes to sensory-cortex-specific and dually regulated NREMS, enabling local sleep regulation according to use- and experience-dependence.
A study on wild baboons found that the ability to acquire and exploit social information is dependent on phenotypic constraints operating at three separate steps: acquisition, application, and exploitation. Phenotypic constraints were identified at each step, including peripheral individuals being less likely to acquire and apply social information and subordinate females being less likely to exploit it successfully. Social bonds and personality also played a role in the constraints. The study highlights the sequential nature of information use and the importance of individual variation in capturing benefits. Phenotypic limitations on social information use were explored, including social, behavioral, and demographic phenotypes, such as individual dominance rank, position in the social network, personality (boldness), age, and sex. The study also investigated which of five networks best predicted the diffusion of information through the troops about the location of a highly preferred food. The study suggests the need to consider alternative networks in the identification of information diffusion paths.
A study has shown that a vaccine using a genetically modified Herpes Simplex Virus-2 (HSV-2) successfully prevented lethal infections in mice. The virus, which had its gene that encodes gD-2 deleted, was able to replicate on cells that contain HSV-1, but failed to replicate in non-complementing cells or cause the onset of herpes. After two subcutaneous immunisations of the virus, mice were challenged with a lethal dose of wild-type HSV-2, and all were completely protected from the lethal virus. The study also found that passive transfer of immune serum containing virus antibodies completely protected against wild-type HSV-2 infections.   
This document describes a study of how cellular tension affects the spatial organization and multimerization of TGFβ receptors, using high-resolution imaging and biochemical assays. The researchers found that TβRII is discretely organized in spatial domains at the cell surface, with integrin-rich focal adhesions organizing TβRII around TβRI, limiting the integration of TβRII while sequestering TβRI at these sites. Disruption of cellular tension leads to a collapse of this spatial organization, driving formation of heteromeric TβRI/TβRII complexes and Smad activation. The study provides new insight into the mechanisms that integrate biochemical and physical cues in the cell.
Researchers have used a high-throughput method to identify molecules that interact with fluconazole, an antifungal agent widely available for treating invasive fungal infections. These infections cause 1.6 million deaths annually, mainly in immunocompromised individuals. The researchers found 40 molecules that amplified the activity of fluconazole, potentially altering patient outcomes, and also identified molecules that acted antagonistically, decreasing efficacy. They found that the critical frontline beta-lactam antibiotics antagonize fluconazole activity. A promising fluconazole-synergizing anticholinergic drug, dicyclomine, increased fungal cell permeability and inhibited nutrient intake when combined with fluconazole, doubling the time-to-endpoint of mice with Cryptococcus neoformans meningitis. The researchers used their high-throughput method to screen a library of small molecules enriched for FDA-approved molecules, and identified 59 molecules that interacted with fluconazole, either synergistically or antagonistically.
Researchers have found that rice antivirus defense requires Argonaute18 (AGO18), a protein that sequesters microRNA168 (miR168) to alleviate repression of rice AGO1, which is essential for antiviral RNAi. Stable transgenic expression of AGO18 confers broad-spectrum virus resistance in rice. The study also found that AGO18 competes with AGO1 for binding miR168, which results in elevated levels of AGO1 in infected plants to enable antiviral defense. Rice viral pathogens are a major threat to rice production worldwide, and the incidence and severity of rice viral diseases in many rice growing regions are unpredictable.
Autophagy is a process that allows cells to survive periods of starvation by recycling nutrients and maintaining energy. It is mediated by a set of conserved proteins, the ATG proteins, but the cellular cues that activate these proteins during amino acid starvation are incompletely understood. This study shows that two related kinases, MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3, positively regulate autophagy by phosphorylating an essential ATG protein, Beclin 1, at serine 90. This phosphorylation site is crucial for the tumor suppressor function of Beclin 1, and is inhibited by the negative regulator BCL2. The study also confirms that endogenous Beclin 1 undergoes phosphorylation at residue S90 in response to nutrient starvation in parallel with autophagy induction. The Beclin 1 S90 phosphorylation site was shown to be essential for autophagy induction in response to nutrient starvation.
The study investigates hybridization between two species of swordtail fish, Xiphophorus birchmanni and X. malinche, and the genetic incompatibilities that contribute to reproductive isolation between them. The study uses a high-resolution genome scan for linkage disequilibrium between unlinked genomic regions in naturally occurring hybrid populations to estimate that hundreds of pairs of genomic regions contribute to reproductive isolation between these species, despite them being recently diverged. The study highlights the role of negative epistatic interactions between genes from different parental genomes in decreasing the fitness of hybrids and limiting gene flow between species. The study develops a modified version of the multiplexed shotgun genotyping (MSG) protocol to evaluate genome-wide patterns of LD in hybrid populations and identifies interacting genomic regions under selection in hybrids. The study supports the conclusion that a large number of loci contribute to reproductive isolation between these two species, that these loci have higher divergence than the genomic background, and that selection against genetic incompatibilities maintains associations between loci derived from the same parental genome.
Munc18-1 is a protein that plays a crucial role in neurotransmitter release, facilitating the assembly of the SNARE complex that is necessary for proper function. The interaction between Munc18-1 and synaptobrevin, a component of the SNARE complex, has been unclear. However, new research using NMR experiments has shown that Munc18-1 binds specifically and non-specifically to synaptobrevin. The study demonstrates that autoinhibition of synaptobrevin binding enables or facilitates the existence of Munc13-dependent modes of regulation of neurotransmitter release. Overall, the research offers new insights into the role of Munc18-1 in this vital process.
Flexible responding in the face of dynamic reward associations requires registering a change in value of the primary reinforcer, adjusting the value of secondary reinforcers, and guiding action selection to optimal choices. These processes rely on the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, and mediodorsal thalamus. To dissociate the role of the mediodorsal thalamus, macaques were tested on a reinforcer devaluation task while transiently inactivating the MD. results showed that the MD is required for adjusting the value of object representations and for appropriate action selection. Impaired devaluation indicates that the MD plays a central role in the devaluation circuit. These findings suggest that the role of the MD in specific phases of devaluation is crucial for flexible responding, especially when accommodating unstable reward contingencies.
A study has developed an optical method to track and quantify gait parameters in freely walking fruit flies, allowing for a comprehensive description of many locomotion parameters. The study found that blocking proprioceptive feedback led to deficient step precision, although interleg coordination and the ability to execute a tripod gait were unaffected. The study also revealed that flies do not switch abruptly between gaits but rely on a continuum of gait patterns. The study was important as there has been a lack of a high-resolution and accessible assay to monitor fruit fly walking that can be used to study locomotion. The optical method monitors walking in fruit flies through frustrated Total Internal Reflection (fTIR) coupled with high-speed video imaging.
A study on flaviviruses, including important human pathogens such as dengue and Zika viruses, has identified a conserved, conformation-tunable cis-acting element called 5′-UAR-flanking stem (UFS) in their genomic 5′ terminus. Researchers found that UFS was critical for efficient NS5 recruitment and viral RNA synthesis in different flaviviruses. The study also shows that UFS is switched by genome cyclization to regulate dynamic RdRp binding for vRNA replication, making the element a crucial communication mechanism between flavivirus genome cyclization and RdRp recruitment. The UFS element allows flaviviruses to function as a switch-like mechanism among RNA viruses, tackling specific stages of replication.
The study investigated the role of NuMA, a protein that interacts with microtubules, in mitotic spindle orientation, which is crucial for generating cell diversity and proper tissue morphogenesis. Previous studies suggested that cortical dynein/dynactin was sufficient to generate forces on astral microtubules to orient the spindle, with NuMA acting as a passive tether. However, this study revealed that NuMA’s MT-binding domain is essential for spindle orientation establishment in keratinocytes, and its loss resulted in defects in spindle orientation and differentiation, leading to neonatal lethality. NuMA-TIP was found to localize specifically to both MT plus and minus ends following treatment with nocodazole, demonstrating its preference for binding to depolymerizing MTs and MT ends that exhibit protofilament curling. NuMA-TIP was also found to be necessary and sufficient for microtubule tip localization. Loss of spindle orientation in matrix cells results in defective differentiation of matrix-derived lineages. Hence, the study reveals an additional and direct function of NuMA during mitotic spindle positioning, as well as a reiterative use of spindle orientation in the skin to build diverse structures.
A study synthesized 69 independent studies reporting 660 observations of the impacts of chemical stressors and nutrient enrichment on animal and microbial decomposer diversity and litter decomposition. The study found that declines in decomposer diversity and abundance explain reduced litter decomposition in response to stressors but not nutrients. This indicates that the consequences of observed biodiversity change for ecosystems depend on the kind of environmental change, and are especially significant when human activities decrease biodiversity. The study highlights the need to quantify environmental change effects on decomposer diversity, along with potential knock-on effects on litter decomposition.
Researchers have identified the mechanism underlying transient weakness in recessive myotonia congenita by performing intracellular recordings from muscle in both genetic and pharmacologic mouse models. They found that transient depolarizations, called "plateau potentials," of the membrane potential contribute to the weakness. Na+ persistent inward current (NaPIC) through NaV1.4 channels triggers the plateau potentials, while current through CaV1.1 Ca2+ channels contributes to their duration. Inhibiting NaPIC with ranolazine prevents the development of plateau potentials and eliminates transient weakness in vivo. The ClC-1 chloride channel is the primary defect causing myotonia congenita, leading to hyperexcitability and muscle stiffness. The researchers conclude that targeting NaPIC may be an effective treatment to prevent transient weakness in myotonia congenita.
New research has uncovered substantial differences in gut health between male and female fruit flies as they age. The study found that the female intestinal system undergoes major deterioration driven by intestinal stem cell division, while males are better able to maintain gut barrier function, even at old ages. Researchers also found that males are more likely to succumb to intestinal challenges to which females are resistant. The study suggests that the sex differences in intestinal health are underpinned by differences in patterns of decline in specific tissues, and highlights the importance of the gut in the sex differences in aging seen in humans. The research also found that dietary restriction reduces gut pathology in aging females and extends female lifespan more than male.
Multicellularity, which endows higher-order functionality in organs through a structure-function relationship, remains poorly understood. The topological properties of complex organ architecture were studied using quantitative network analysis of cellular interactions in the plant embryonic stem. The study revealed coherent conduits of reduced path length across epidermal atrichoblast cell files, and the preferential movement of small molecules was demonstrated along this cell type. The topological analysis of multicellular structural organization reveals higher order functions for patterning and principles of complex organ construction. Multicellularity arose multiple times across evolution, yet understanding how selective pressures shaped the cellular configurations of these complex assemblies remains poorly understood. Cellular interactions play a key role in plant development, mediating patterning, and cell identity. Whole organ 3D imaging at cellular resolution and computational image analysis of plant organs can enable the understanding of cellular interactions, patterning, and the function of the system as a whole.
The study explores the cellular heterogeneity in transcriptional response to influenza virus infection, using single-cell mRNA sequencing. The results show that there is extensive cell-to-cell variation in viral transcriptional productivity, with some cells deriving over half their mRNA from the virus. The study also finds that activation of innate immune pathways is rare, and that the relative abundances of viral mRNAs are consistent across infected cells. The research highlights the complexity of viral infection at the level of single cells, and demonstrates remarkable heterogeneity in the transcriptional outcome of influenza virus infection among nominally identical cells infected with a relatively pure population of virions.
The cyanobacterium Nostoc PCC 7120 develops nitrogen-fixing heterocysts, which are regulated by the protein HetR that activates the synthesis of inhibitory morphogens. The interaction of HetR with PatS is necessary to suppress inhibition and differentiate heterocysts, but the molecular mechanism by which the cell becomes immune to self-inhibition is not known. The protein HetL provides immunity to the heterocyst by interacting with HetR at the same interface as PatS, counteracting PatS's inhibitory effect. HetL's interaction with HetR does not inhibit its DNA-binding activity. The HetR-HetL interaction involves the R223 residue of HetR, which is also involved in the interaction with PatS-5/PatS-6, and the interface matches the one involved in PatS-5 interaction. The Hood domain of HetR is critical for HetR-HetL interface, and the interaction is maintained by a large network of electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds.
Researchers have used phylogenetic analysis to investigate the relationships between the eight RNA segments of the influenza A virus (IAV) genome in seasonal human IAV strains. They found that intersegmental relationships were largely conserved over time in H3N2 viruses but diverged in H1N1 strains isolated before and after the 2009 pandemic. These relationships are not solely driven by protein sequence and may be governed by RNA-RNA interactions. Parallel evolution between vRNA segments could reveal epistatic constraints on the genomic assembly and reassortment of IAV. The study suggests that a phylogenetic approach could be used to investigate epistasis arising from direct RNA-RNA interactions between IAV segments.
The document discusses the limits of paracrine signaling, which can reduce cellular response variability but also reduces the gradient magnitude. The study used a microfluidics-based device to quantify the signal and noise of Ca2+ and ERK spatial gradients in response to an in vitro wound. The results confirm the existence of a maximum gradient signal to noise ratio and reveal that cells use optimal levels of paracrine signaling to maximize the accuracy of gradient-based positional information. While variability is a biological trait with significant phenotypic consequences, the functional significance of cellular variability suggests that cellular variability magnitude is regulated. Cells share information with each other via paracrine signaling, which effectively averages variable cellular responses, and therefore reduces cellular variability.
A new study has revealed how two lineages of influenza B, Victoria and Yamagata, evolve and circulate differently. The research analyzed 908 influenza B viruses from over 26,000 laboratory-confirmed cases in children and adults from 2002 to 2013 in eastern Australia and New Zealand. It found that the Victoria lineage experienced strong seasonal fluctuations in relative genetic diversity, while little change was observed over the same time period for the Yamagata lineage. The study also showed that the Victoria lineage transmitted with greater force in certain years, indicating greater heterogeneity in transmission between seasons for Victoria viruses.
The cerebellum is critical for movement coordination and receives sensory and motor-related information through granule cells. The issue of whether these cells can synapse with multiple types of mossy fibers, enabling more complex functions, or whether they are unimodal is unresolved. However, a recent study using cell-type-specific projection mapping with synaptic resolution found that separate sensory and basilar pontine pathways converge onto individual granule cells, and corollary discharges from upper body motor cortical areas are transported through the convergent basilar pontine pathways. These findings suggest that granule cells may be multimodal and have an associative capacity predicted in the Marr-Albus theory of cerebellar function.
Planar cell polarity (PCP) is responsible for regulating basal body (BB) docking and positioning during cilia formation, but the mechanism behind this is not fully understood. A recent study investigated a gene called Flattop (Fltp), which is activated during PCP acquisition in ciliated tissues. Fltp knock-out mice showed BB docking and ciliogenesis defects in multiciliated lung cells and were necessary for positioning kinocilium in monociliated inner ear hair cells. Fltp interacts with Dishevelled 2 and BB/spindle positioning protein Dlg3, suggesting that they cooperatively translate PCP cues for BB positioning in the inner ear. This research could have implications for ciliary diseases and asymmetric cell division.
The lung cancer subtype invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA), which exhibits gastric differentiation and has a distinct spectrum of driver oncogenes, is associated with loss of the pulmonary lineage specifier NKX2-1/TTF1 in human and murine lung adenocarcinoma. In a BRAFV600E-driven lung adenocarcinoma mouse model, NKX2-1 is required for early tumorigenesis, but dispensable for established tumor growth, and NKX2-1-deficient, BRAFV600E-driven tumors resemble human IMA and exhibit a distinct response to BRAF/MEK inhibitors. NKX2-1-negative cells fail to exit the cell cycle after BRAF/MEK inhibitors, but the inhibitors induce cell identity switching in these cells within the gastric lineage, which is driven in part by WNT signaling and FoxA1/2. These data elucidate a complex, reciprocal relationship between lineage specifiers and oncogenic signaling pathways in the regulation of lung adenocarcinoma identity that is likely to impact lineage-specific therapeutic strategies.
Neuronal dendrites and axons are guided by extracellular cues which provide spatial signals that instruct them on how to grow, turn and branch. Receptors on different neurons interpret the same cues differently based on the receptors they express. The regulation of guidance receptors is critical for neuronal morphogenesis. This paper discusses the role of KPC-1, a C. elegans Furin homolog, in guiding dendrites by targeting the branching receptor DMA-1 to late endosomes. KPC-1 regulates the level of DMA-1 on dendrites and the precise regulation of guidance receptors is crucial for the flexibility of response to guidance signals. Developing neuronal dendrites are guided by extracellular signals, so different neurons can interpret the same cue differently based on the receptors they express. The results show that development is not just about what signals are present but also about how the signals are interpreted.
This study explores the conformational heterogeneity of the protein SETD8 to understand its enzymatic catalysis and allosteric mechanisms. The researchers used covalent inhibitors and depleting native ligands to obtain diverse X-ray structures of SETD8, which were then used to seed distributed atomistic molecular dynamics simulations. Markov state models were built to reveal how slow conformational motions and states are relevant to catalysis. The study provides molecular insight into enzymatic catalysis and allosteric mechanisms of SETD8 via its detailed conformational landscape. Additionally, the study highlights the importance of referencing conformational landscapes for elucidating enzymatic catalysis and allosteric regulation of proteins. The findings may provide insight into the discovery of potent, selective, and cellularly active inhibitors of SETD8 and other PKMTs.
Researchers have discovered that liver Kupffer cells play a critical role in clearing multiple alphaviruses, including chikungunya, Ross River, and o’nyong ‘nyong viruses, from the circulation of mice, thereby limiting viremia and impeding viral dissemination. Mechanistically, they identified scavenger receptor SR-A6 (MARCO) as the receptor required for efficient alphavirus clearance. Mutational analysis revealed that viral clearance from the circulation is strictly dependent on the presence of lysine at distinct residues within the E2 glycoproteins of the alphaviruses. These findings reveal a previously unrecognized innate immune pathway that controls alphavirus viremia and dissemination in vertebrate hosts, ultimately influencing disease severity and likely transmission efficiency.
The matricellular protein SMOC (Secreted Modular Calcium binding protein) and its Drosophila orthologue pentagone (pent) both inhibit bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling downstream of its receptor via activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling. However, pent primarily expands the range of BMP signaling during wing patterning, while SMOC inhibits BMP signaling. The extracellular calcium binding (EC) domain of SMOC is able to expand the range of BMP signaling by binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and competing with BMP2 for HSPG-binding. BMP signaling is involved in many growth and differentiation events essential for determining body structure, and mechanisms for regulating BMP signaling include ligand binding by extracellular BMP antagonists and intracellular feedback inhibition downstream of the BMP receptor. Pent and SMOC have similar structures and both contain an N-terminal follistatin-like domain, two thyroglobulin-like domains, and a C-terminal EC domain. Attempts to express XSMOC-1 in Drosophila weren’t successful, but assays using SMOC expressed in bacteria and refolded together with relevant constructs were able to be performed. It is unknown whether SMOC expands BMP signaling in vertebrates through a similar mechanism as pent.
Scientists have discovered a way of rapidly copying RNA templates that could have formed the basis of early life forms on Earth.  The early formation of oligonucleotides or RNA polymers in the prebiotic environment is a possible intermediate stage between nucleotide synthesis and the canonical RNA world of primordial cells, however the process needed to replicate swiftly and accurately for the system to be viable, which it has not previously done. Now scientists can copy mixed-sequence RNA templates, allowing the synthesis of a significant part of an active hammerhead ribozyme by immobilising the primer and template on a bead and adding individual monomers in sequence, "forging a link between nonenzymatic polymerisation and the RNA world".
Research has identified potential targets for COVID-19 treatment by using genetic tests and analyses to find host proteins that are vulnerable to the virus. The study found several known targets as well as identifying new ones, including Fas-mediated apoptosis and soluble CD209, which directly interacts with the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. ABO was also found to be associated with COVID-19 susceptibility and severity, with the lead ABO signal associated strongly with plasma concentrations of soluble CD209. The study used proteome-wide genetic colocalisation tests and polygenic and cis-Mendelian randomisation analyses leveraging publicly available protein and COVID-19 datasets. The study provides a prioritised list of host targets potentially exploited by SARS-CoV-2 and is a precursor for further research on CD209 and FAS as therapeutically tractable targets for COVID-19.
Niemann-Pick type C is a genetic disorder caused by NPC proteins dysfunction. The NPC proteins promote microautophagy in stationary phase and under nitrogen starvation conditions, likely by increasing sterol in the limiting membrane of the vacuole. The lipid droplets by a microautophagic mechanism are engulfed under these conditions. The microautophagic mechanism separates the microautophagic vesicles from other structures that engage free-radical formation or necrosis. The vacuolar membrane in stationary phase yeast is tightly bound to the intramembrane particles that represent transmembrane proteins. The NPC proteins play a critical role in the formation and expansion of the raft-like domain in the vacuole during the lipophagy process.
Researchers have developed a paper-strip based platform called RAY that can identify mutational signatures of coronavirus variants in patient samples without the need for sequencing-based diagnostics. RAY uses Francisella novicida Cas9 (FnCas9) enzyme to detect mismatches in the target and has been found to be successful in detecting the N501Y mutation present across multiple variant lineages of SARS-CoV-2 within an hour with a sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 97%. The RAY platform can be adapted rapidly for detecting other mutations, highlighting the advantages of quick optimization and rollout of CRISPR diagnostics beyond COVID-19. The study was funded by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in India.
Enteric neurons play a vital role in regulating feeding through specialized mechanosensory ion channels in the fruit fly Drosophila, according to new research. These channels detect and respond to mechanical tension in the gut, and provide an attractive alternative over current therapeutic strategies for weight loss that often have significant side-effects. The discovery of the involvement of these channels in regulating feeding also lays groundwork for investigating mechanisms underlying sensation of fullness in humans.
Researchers have identified key determinants that allow for polyreactivity, the ability of antibodies to bind to multiple targets, while still being selected for high-affinity binding to a single target. A bioinformatic pipeline was used to analyze over 1000 polyreactive and non-polyreactive antibody sequences, identifying an increase in inter-loop crosstalk and a propensity for a neutral binding surface as determinants of polyreactivity. A machine learning-based classification software was then developed to determine the polyreactivity status of a given sequence with over 75% accuracy. While polyreactivity can be beneficial in natural immune responses, it can also be undesirable for generating therapeutic antibodies with high specificity. The computational framework provides a powerful tool for future studies in immune repertoire analysis.
The RNA polymerase II (PolII) transcribes RNA within a chromatin context, whereby nucleosomes act as barriers to transcription. However, in vivo transcription through chromatin is highly efficient, suggesting the existence of factors that overcome this obstacle. The chromatin remodeler Chd1 is shown to be recruited to promoter proximal nucleosomes of genes undergoing active transcription, where Chd1 is responsible for the vast majority of PolII-directed nucleosome turnover. Through the combined action of PolII, elongation factors, nucleosome modifications, and chromatin remodelers, the chromatin barrier to transcription is highly dynamic, with nucleosomal turnover correlating with gene expression. Nucleosomes are disrupted to allow efficient elongation and are reassembled in the wake of PolII to prevent cryptic initiation from intragenic sequences. Chromatin remodelers use the energy from ATP hydrolysis to evict, assemble, and slide nucleosomes in order to guide the proper nucleosome positioning at key sites, such as eukaryotic promoters, where they maintain the nucleosome-depleted region (NDR) and phased flanking nucleosomes. In metazoans, PolII is often enriched immediately downstream of the transcription start site (TSS), whereby Chd1 is recruited to overcome the nucleosomal barrier to allow transcription within a chromatin context. Furthermore, mammalian Chd1 is required for pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells by maintaining euchromatin and is also required for efficient reprogramming, suggesting that Chd1 plays a key role in mammalian cellular identity.
The document discusses the recent claim of Gagliano et al. that pea plants can exhibit associative learning, which has historically been thought to be a behavior only exhibited by animals. The experiment involved training plants in a Y-shaped maze with fans and lights attached and demonstrated that plants were able to associate wind stimuli with the location of light sources. The document discusses a replication attempt of the experiment and additional controls used to test the validity of the findings. While the replication failed to demonstrate the same result, the document concludes that further verification and experimentation is necessary before the claim can be fully accepted. The document also discusses the significance of learning in organisms and the capacity for plants to exhibit complex environmental responses.
Researchers have used primate neurophysiology and human magnetoencephalography to recover a single-trial index of the prefrontal cortex's (PFC) internal states, which can explain the origins of neural representations of economic variables. This index can bridge the gap between human neuroimaging data and underlying neuronal activity, revealing a functionally dissociable interaction between different PFC subsections in guiding cost-benefit decisions. The observations were cast in terms of a recurrent neural network model of choice, providing formal links to mechanistic dynamical accounts of decision-making. The approach allows for an index of single-trial dynamics from LFP data, which has the same meaning across different electrodes and recording sessions.
Radiomics is a field that converts medical images into mineable data. It extracts a large number of quantitative imaging features that define tumor intensity, shape, size and texture. In a rigorous analysis of  two independent cohorts of 262 North American and 89 European patients with lung cancer, researchers were able to identify previously undescribed associations between radiomic imaging features, molecular pathways and clinical factors. They found a relationship between immune response, inflammation and survival, which was validated by immunohistochemical staining. A number of imaging features showed predictive value for specific pathways such as RNA polymerase transcription and intensity dispersion, which was predictive of the autodegration pathway of a ubiquitin ligase. Finally, prognostic biomarkers performed highest when combining radiomic, genetic and clinical information, indicating complementary value of these data. Radiomics could potentially advance clinical decision-making by systematically analyzing standard-of-care medical images.
The document discusses the role of genetic and epigenetic changes in the development of cancer. Oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are two major categories of genes that play a critical role in carcinogenesis. Genetic mutations, epigenetic changes, and alterations in the splicing pattern of cancer genes can convert wild-type forms of cancer genes into driver genes. Furthermore, alterations in the maintenance of the genome, epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome increase the chance that various constituents of other cellular pathways will experience alterations that favor the acquisition of capabilities that permit the proliferation, survival, and metastasis of tumor cells. However, identification of cancer driver genes can be challenging due to intrinsic mutation hotspots and the influence of chromatin organization on regional mutation rates in human cancer cells.
A study has revealed that ultradian rhythms in locomotor activity, which occur across various mammalian species but do not depend on the master circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), may be associated with dopaminergic tone. The findings suggest that dopamine operates as an arousing agent in the brain and can affect ultradian oscillations. The research denotes that ultradian and methamphetamine-induced rhythms of locomotor activity are generated by a dopaminergic ultradian oscillator (DUO). Ultradian locomotor oscillations persist in rodents even upon ablation of the SCN or genetic disruption of the circadian clock. The study shows that DUO usually cycles in harmony with the circadian clock, but can desynchronize when dopamine tone is elevated, thereby producing aberrant patterns of arousal. The study further notices that ultradian rhythms have received little research attention despite their prevalence and hypothesized biological significance.
Researchers have used fMRI to investigate where in the brain visual and conceptual features of object concepts are integrated. Using representational similarity analysis, they found evidence for distinct coding of visual and conceptual features in specific regions of the brain, with distinctive coding of visual features in the lateral occipital cortex and conceptual features in the temporal pole and parahippocampal cortex. They also found evidence for integrative coding of visual and conceptual object features in the perirhinal cortex, suggesting that this region supports the representation of fully specified object concepts through the integration of their visual and conceptual features. The study is important in shedding light on how object concepts are represented in the human brain and could have implications for models of semantic memory.
Scientists have developed a model that predicts how the visual cortex of humans responds to stimuli such as words and faces. The research, published in eLife, involved measuring responses to a range of images while subjects performed different tasks. The researchers developed a two-stage computer model of bottom-up processes in the visual cortex, the Template model. When compared to the Category model, which predicts a fixed response level for stimuli from the preferred category and a different response level for all other stimuli, the Template model had a stronger predictive power. 
This article discusses the mechanisms of physiological regulation during hibernation in animals. The cycles involve torpor and arousal, with Brown Adipose Tissue (BAT) driving periodic arousal by generating essential heat. The article describes a digital transcriptome analysis of molecular pathways underlying the activity cycles of hibernator BAT, identifying pathways that were enriched in a C-rich motif and genes required for BAT activation. The study showed that some transcripts increased during torpor not by elevated transcription but rather by enhanced stabilization associated with maintenance and/or extension of long poly (A) tails. This mechanism protects a subset of transcripts from ongoing bulk degradation instead of increased transcription.
The process of membrane constriction during cell division is fundamental, yet little is known about the molecular and mechanistic details of this process. Prokaryotic cell division is guided by a ring structure containing the bacterial tubulin homologue FtsZ, and this study obtained high-resolution images of the FtsZ ring in Caulobacter crescentus and Escherichia coli by means of electron cryotomography. The study found that the FtsZ ring appears to show strong fluorescence intensity variations that may suggest that the FtsZ ring is discontinuous. Moreover, in vivo and in vitro, the Z-ring is composed of a small, single-layered band of filaments parallel to the membrane, creating a continuous ring through lateral filament contacts. This study provides new insight into the mechanism of FtsZ-based cell membrane constriction that is accompanied by filament sliding.
The loss of cellular identity is often linked to tumor initiation, and epigenetically-acting chromatin factors are responsible for preservation of transcriptional programs determining cellular identity. Polyhomeotic (ph) is a Drosophila epigenetic regulator, and its disruption leads to tumors that show a shift towards an embryonic-like signature. The embryonic transcription factor knirps (kni) is revealed to be an oncogene, with its ability to activate JAK/STAT signaling and block differentiation. Tumor growth in ph mutant cells can be reduced by overexpressing a differentiation factor, demonstrating that epigenetically-derailed tumor conditions can be reversed when targeting key players in the transcriptional network. The study also shows that deregulation of genes involved in tissue development and enrichment for transcription factors among upregulated genes occurs when epigenetic regulators are disrupted. Moreover, tumors initiated by ph disruption or misexpression of kni share features such as ectopic activation of JAK/STAT signaling and a differentiation block. The study finds that kni is crucial for the tumorigenic capacity of cells whose transcriptional regulatory program is modulated. Reduction of kni expression leads to a decrease in tumor volume, and the differentiation block seen is prevented upon reducing the level of kni expression. Hence, kni is identified as a new oncogene in Drosophila.
The study investigates how a gradient of expression of a kinase called Four-jointed (Fj) specifies planar polarised distributions of cadherins Fat and Dachsous in the Drosophila wing. Through in vivo assays and computational modelling, they demonstrate that Fj acts both on Fat to promote its binding to Dachsous and on Dachsous to inhibit its binding to Fat, with a bias towards a stronger effect on Fat. The study also explores the mechanisms that regulate planar cell polarity, which refers to the coordinated polarisation of cells within the plane of a tissue.
Ankyrin-B (AnkB) is a protein that plays a critical role in endosomal membrane trafficking and is involved in coordinating polarized transport of specialized endocytic cargos, such as α5β1-integrin, in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). AnkB integrates phosphoinositide lipids, Rab GTPases, and microtubule-based motors to promote long-range organelle transport. AnkB binds to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P)-positive organelles and dynactin to promote their long-range motility. AnkB also interacts with RabGAP1L, which inactivates Rab22A, a Rab GTPase regulating endosomal identity and trafficking. AnkB recruits RabGAP1L to PI3P-positive organelles and promotes polarized trafficking to the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts. AnkB also associates with multiple organelles through PI3P lipids and promotes their long-range transport through interaction with the dynactin motor protein adaptor complex. AnkB is an unexpected key element in coordinating polarized transport of α5β1-integrin and likely of other specialized endocytic cargos.
The study shows that neuronal circuits can maintain a balance between stability and flexibility under changing environmental conditions by regulating the firing rates and synchronicity of populations of neurons. The researchers used cultured hippocampal networks to show that adaptive mechanisms maintain firing macro-stability without achieving local homeostasis at the single-neuron level. The study suggests that the precision of homeostatic control at different spatial scales challenges the cell-autonomous theory of network homeostasis and illustrates the existence of network-wide regulation rules. The research findings question what basic properties of neural networks are subjected to homeostatic control, whether homeostatic control systems are equally precise at the level of individual neurons and neuronal populations, what triggers synaptic homeostatic mechanisms and how compensatory changes in synaptic strength affect network functions. Long-term measurements of spiking activity over several days from the same neuron or population of neurons can address these questions, but reliable experimentation requires greater stability than can be achieved in vivo. Therefore, the study utilized cerebral cortex neuronal networks grown in vitro to control the experimental environment accurately. The researchers used long-term extracellular spike recordings at the population and single-neuron levels using micro-electrode arrays and calcium imaging, along with intracellular patch-clamp measurements of synaptic responses and imaging of synaptic activity. The study also analyzed use-dependent synaptic inhibition via G-protein-coupled receptors using a selective GABABR agonist, baclofen, to inhibit synaptic vesicle release. The findings demonstrate that networks in vitro have the ability to homeostatically regulate their mean firing rate.
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa that started in late 2013 has waned since November 2015, with more than 28,000 cases and 11,000 deaths in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Researchers have analyzed 66 mathematical modeling studies of the Ebola virus disease, focusing on uncertainties, data used for modeling, public sharing of data and results, and model performance to help improve the response to future health emergencies. The models addressed six key uncertainties about the epidemic, including transmissibility and epidemic forecasts. The study found that the number of publications with models to estimate R increased rapidly early in the epidemic, with the growth rate of publications with phylogenetic modeling applications and clinical trial models increasing later in the outbreak. Additionally, 74% of models reported included assumptions about disease transmission, and 26% were purely phenomenological.
Scientists at the National Institutes of Health have discovered a way to create a potential HIV vaccine by modifying forms of the 426c Env glycoprotein. The VRC01-class bNAb family targets the CD4 binding site on Env, and modified forms are expected to activate germline-reverted B cell receptors which could lead to the creation of a protective immune response against HIV-1. Highly potent bNAbs derived from the VH1-2*02 gene segment have proved effective in recent clinical trials against the virus. By understanding how the VRC01-class bNAb family binds to the glycoprotein, the team believes it can immunise people against HIV-1.

A new method for early detection and monitoring of infectious agents in wildlife involves using hematophagous flies to identify the infectious agents circulating in wild vertebrates. In Gabon, 1230 blood-engorged flies were caught and identified blood meals were from 20 vertebrate species, including mammals, birds, and reptiles. 9% of the flies were infected with different extant malaria parasites. This approach of using hematophagous flies as ‘flying syringes’ constitutes an interesting approach to investigate blood-borne pathogen diversity in wild vertebrates and could be used as an early detection tool of zoonotic pathogens.
Researchers have discovered that the enzyme B3GNT1, previously thought to be involved in poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthesis, is actually a glucuronyltransferase that specifically targets alpha and beta anomers of xylose. This new information is significant because mutations in the gene encoding for B3GNT1 have been linked to congenital muscular dystrophy with hypoglycosylation of α-dystroglycan, a condition known as secondary dystroglycanopathies. The findings provide further insight into the O-mannosylation protein glycosylation pathway and the role of enzymes in the synthesis of complex glycans in humans.
Rabex-5 and Rabaptin-5 work together to activate Rab5 and promote the fusion of early endosomes in endocytosis. The Rabex-5 GEF activity is autoinhibited by its CC domain and its activation by Rabaptin-5C21 is not well understood. The crystal structures of Rabex-5 in complex with Rabaptin-5C212 and Rab5, as well as biophysical and biochemical analyses were performed. The Rabex-5CC assumes an amphipathic α-helix that binds weakly to the substrate-binding site of the GEF domain leading to weak autoinhibition of the GEF activity. Binding of Rabaptin-5C21 to Rabex-5 displaces Rabex-5CC, leading to the release of the GEF activity. Our results reveal the molecular mechanism for the regulation of the Rabex-5 GEF activity.
The study focuses on how the pre-TCR and Notch signaling pathways interact through the PI3K pathway in the β-selection of T cells. The study found that a non-canonical mechanism by the Itpkb enzyme restricts the pro-metabolic PI3K/Akt signaling induced by pre-TCR to enforce the Notch-dependence of β-selection. The study also found that Itpkb-/- mice had an accelerated, Notch-independent, but pre-TCR dependent differentiation to the DP stage. Despite lacking Itpkb, DN3 cells in these mice had normal total TCR-beta and CD3 protein levels. Overall, these findings elucidated the mechanism of β-selection, which is the major cell-fate determining event for αβ T cells.
Marine organisms, including reef-building corals, use ultraviolet-protective compounds such as mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) and gadusols produced by bacteria, fungi, algae and marine invertebrates to survive high-solar irradiance. These compounds have also been found in marine fish, thought to be of dietary or symbiotic origin. However, a recent study has found that fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds can actually synthesise gadusol themselves. The study found that the gadusol pathway discovered in vertebrates could provide a solution for the large-scale production of natural sunscreen and antioxidants for pharmaceuticals and cosmetics.
B-1a IgH repertoires differ significantly from the repertoires of other murine B cell populations and are defined by distinct mechanisms, according to a study coupling high-dimensional FACS sorting with large-scale quantitative IgH deep-sequencing. The study tracked B-1a cells from neonatal spleen to long-term residence in adult peritoneum and spleen, and found that de novo B-1a IgH rearrangement occurs mainly after birth and continues to evolve profoundly. Furthermore, V(D)J selection and AID-mediated diversification operate comparably in germ-free and conventional mice, indicating that these unique B-1a repertoire-defining mechanisms are driven by antigens that are not derived from microbiota.
The ability to distinguish between male and female flies is crucial for mating and species propagation. Recent studies have identified chemosensory neurons that detect male and female pheromones in Drosophila. Anatomical, calcium imaging, optogenetic, and behavioral studies have been used to examine the central neural pathways in the male brain that process these pheromones. Research has found that sensory neurons that detect female pheromones activate a specific type of neuron in the ventral nerve cord, which causes the activation of P1 neurons that play a crucial role in triggering courtship behavior. On the other hand, sensory neurons that detect male pheromones and those that detect female pheromones activate other neurons that inhibit P1, indicating that the balance of excitatory and inhibitory drives into central courtship-promoting neurons controls mating decisions.
Researchers have used genome-wide association studies to explore the interaction between human genomics and HIV-1 viral sequence diversity for the first time. Using paired human and viral data from over 1,000 individuals of western European ancestry, the team identified several associations between the human genome and HIV-1 amino acid variants, with signals only occurring in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region. The authors hoped this “genome-to-genome approach” could become a strategy applicable to the study of other host-pathogen interactions.  

G-quadruplexes (G4) are four-stranded structures formed by G-rich nucleic acids. The sequence and structural features of these structures in vivo remain uncertain. A study of the complex hCEB1 G4-forming sequence found that G4 conformations bear unusual structural features in vitro, indicating the existence of non-canonical G4s in cells. This work has broadened the previous consensus on G4 formation and indicates that the false-negative rate of the initial consensus is massive. The study also demonstrated the existence of at least three types of non-canonical G4s in vivo and highlighted the threat they pose to genomic stability.
The article discusses the use of anaerobic thermophiles, which live in environments similar to those of early Earth, as models to reconstruct early metabolism. Specifically, the article focuses on Thermovibrio ammonificans, a type of bacteria found in geothermal areas that can be used to investigate the evolution of early metabolism due to its deep-branching lineage and reliance on substrates of geothermal origin. Analyses of its genome and proteome show the presence of both ancestral and acquired genes, with evidence suggesting that the last common ancestor within the Aquificae possessed the reductive acetyl-CoA pathway in addition to the previously described rTCA cycle. Furthermore, the article proposes that the redundancy of central metabolic pathways may have been common in ancestral microorganisms.
The document discusses the mechanisms by which beneficial organisms adapt to overcome host defenses in order to form symbiotic partnerships. The study focuses on the evolution of bioluminescent Vibrio fischeri, which colonizes the light organs of the squid Euprymna scolopes. The study found that serial squid passaging of bacteria produced mutations in the binK sensor kinase gene, which conferred a selective advantage that helped the bacteria evade host defenses and colonize the squid. The study highlights the importance of hosts as selective agents that shape emergent symbiont populations and identifies a genetic basis for microbial adaptability.
A team of researchers has discovered that synaptojanin's core function in vivo resides in the Sac1 and 5-phosphatase domains, and not the proline-rich domain (PRD) that it has been previously associated with. Synaptojanin works to facilitate synaptic vesicle recycling at presynaptic terminals. The Sac1 domain plays an unexpected role in targeting synaptojanin to synapses, and the requirement for it is bypassed by tethering the synaptojanin 5-phophatase to the endophilin membrane-bending Bin&#x2013;Amphiphysin&#x2013;Rvs (BAR) domain.
The YidC protein mediates the co-translational insertion of membrane proteins into bacterial cytoplasmic membranes, working either individually or with the SecY complex. There is, however, limited knowledge about YidC's functioning and operability because of a lack structural information. A study, however, presents a structural model of YidC based on evolutionary co-variation analysis, lipid versus protein exposure, and molecular dynamics simulations. The study suggests an arrangement of the five conserved transmembrane domains and a helical hairpin between transmembrane segment two (TM2) and TM3 on the cytoplasmic membrane surface. This arrangement could explain how a single copy of YidC interacts with the ribosome at the ribosomal tunnel exit and identifies a site for membrane protein insertion at the YidC protein-lipid interface.
The article studies the genetic basis of individual variation in cuticular hydrocarbon (CHC) composition in Drosophila melanogaster. The CHCs serve various functions including desiccation resistance and social interactions, especially in species and nest-mate recognition, assessment of reproductive status, and mate choice. The study quantifies variation in CHC profiles in D. melanogaster Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP) and identifies polymorphisms in or near 305 and 173 genes in females and males, respectively, associated with variation in CHCs. Disruption of expression of 24 candidate genes affected CHC composition in one or both sexes, and the Desat2 allele characteristic of African and Caribbean D. melanogaster females was identified in17 DGRP lines. CHCs are produced from the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway, which begins with an acetyl-CoA, where elongase genes catalyze the incorporation of malonyl-CoA units to form very long chain fatty acids. The study provides a new perspective and highlights the complexity of the biosynthetic and catabolic pathways that regulate the dynamics of CHC composition and the stage for adaptive evolution.
Researchers have visualized an anti-protozoan drug bound to a malaria parasite ribosome at an atomic level for the first time using cryogenic electron microscopy. The researchers, who published their study in a Nature Research journal, said the findings suggested that antibiotics which inhibit protein translation could be used as a treatment for malaria, which kills more than half a million people a year, with children being the majority of the victims. Paracetamol is being tested as a potential treatment for the disease alongside the cheap anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen, despite early investigation indicating that it might actually do more harm than good.
The document discusses how the protein PTEN controls glandular morphogenesis (the process of forming and organizing glandular tissues) in mammals through juxtamembrane signaling (signaling that occurs near the cell membrane) and regulation of the small GTPase Cdc42. PTEN interacts with the scaffold protein β-Arrestin1, which in turn binds and suppresses the Cdc42 GTPase-activating protein ARHGAP21. The document proposes that PTEN controls Cdc42-dependent morphogenesis through a β-Arrestin1-ARHGAP21 complex. The effects of PTEN deficiency on glandular morphogenesis were phenocopied by β-Arrestin1 or ARHGAP21 knockdown or inhibition of their interactions. PTEN also regulates β-Arrestin1-ARHGAP21 interactions to control GTPase signaling, mitotic spindle orientation, and 3D multicellular morphology. The document mostly discusses the molecular mechanisms and experiments that were conducted to demonstrate these relationships.
miR-17-92 is an oncomir which encodes six mature miRNAs. The miRNA polycistron has been observed to exhibit oncogenic activity in various human tumors, including Burkitt&rsquo;s lymphoma. The miRNAs regulate multiple cellular processes including proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, differentiation, and metastasis. The miR-92 component of miR-17-92 has been shown to negatively regulate the oncogenic cooperation with c-Myc while also functionally antagonizing the oncogenic miR-19 miRNAs. In the Eμ-myc mouse B-cell lymphoma model, the intact mir-17-92 acted as an oncogene while its miR-92 component exhibited a negative regulation of the oncogenic cooperation with c-Myc. This unexpected effect of miR-92 contrasts with the effect of miR-19 which promotes c-Myc-induced lymphomagenesis by repressing apoptosis.
Researchers have discovered a protein that helps tumours grow by blocking the body's normal process for eliminating cancerous cells. The protein, called BAG2, has frequently been found in cancer patients with a p53 gene mutation, which is present in about half of all cancers. BAG2 is responsible for blocking the body's natural process of eliminating these cancerous, mutated cells. By interfering with the body's natural process, BAG2 allows the mutated cells to flourish and continue propagating cancer. The discovery could pave the way for a more effective cancer therapy in the future.
Researchers demonstrated in zebrafish that nf1 loss leads to active RAS signaling in MYCN-induced neuroblastomas, and that the GRD domain is sufficient to suppress the acceleration of neuroblastoma but not the hypertrophy of sympathoadrenal cells in nf1 mutant embryos. Even though neuroblastoma is a developmental tumor, NF1 relies on a different mechanism of suppressing malignant transformation than it does in modulating normal neural crest cell growth. Researchers showed that MEK inhibitors and retinoids have marked synergy in tumor cell killing in primary nf1a-/- zebrafish neuroblastomas. Loss of NF1 in neuroblastoma cells mediates resistance to retinoic acid via hyperactive RAS signaling. Forced expression of the NF1 GTPase-activating protein-related domain has been used to restore GAP activity in NF1-deficient human and mouse cells. Loss of Nf1 increases the penetrance of MYCN-induced neuroblastoma.
A new study shows that multidrug-resistant bacterial infections are causing significant excess mortality in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). The researchers retrospectively analyzed microbiology laboratory and hospital databases from nine public hospitals in northeast Thailand between 2004 and 2010, and linked the data with the national death register. The results show that 43% of deaths in patients with hospital-acquired infections due to multidrug-resistant bacteria in Thailand in 2010 were caused by excess mortality due to multidrug-resistant bacteria. The researchers call for the integration of information from readily available databases to improve national statistics on the epidemiology and burden of multidrug-resistant infections in LMICs.
A study has shown that arthropods contain a wide variety of previously undiscovered viruses that appear to be ancestral to many of the documented genetic diversity of negative-sense RNA viruses. This greatly enriched diversity revealed that arthropods contain viruses that fall basal to major virus groups, shedding new light on the evolution of genome
A study has identified that Arl13B, a ciliary G-protein mutated in Joubert syndrome, is the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for Arl3. Arl3 is involved in targeting and releasing lipidated cargo proteins in ciliogenesis and cilia maintenance. The study shows that Arl13B's GEF activity is mediated by its G-domain and an additional C-terminal helix. The GEF activity of Arl13B leads to an increased Arl3·GTP level, which then generates an Arl3·GTP compartment where ciliary cargo is released. Mutations in Arl proteins or their regulators can lead to ciliopathies including Joubert syndrome. Understanding the regulatory proteins of Arl3 will help to enhance our knowledge of how these critical organelles are formed and maintained.
Researchers have discovered a protein that prevents inflammation developing on the skin and other organs. The protein, Sharpin, inhibits the skin inflammation caused by TNF receptor 1-dependent apoptosis of keratinocytes. Mice that lack the protein develop inflammatory lesions on their skin and organs; however, those that had been bred without Fas-associated protein with death domain and receptor-interacting protein kinase 3, which are involved in necroptosis, and lacking Sharpin did not show any adverse symptoms. It is hoped that these findings will help develop new drugs aimed at the prevention of skin inflammation.
A study has found that a small molecule produced by bacteria triggers multicellular development in Salpingoeca rosetta, a microscopic bacteria-eating eukaryote that is one of the closest living relatives of animals. The molecule, Rosette-Inducing Factor 1 (RIF-1), belongs to the small class of sulfonolipids, and its potency is extraordinary. This study provides an example of bacterial sulfonolipids triggering eukaryotic morphogenesis and suggests that bacteria may have contributed to the evolution of animals. Choanoflagellates could provide important insights into the mechanisms underlying bacterial influences on animal biology and evolution. Moreover, understanding the environmental cues that regulate choanoflagellate colony formation could provide a molecular model for animal multicellularity.
A study in northern Malawi found that women with earlier menarche (first period) had earlier sexual debut, earlier marriage, and were more likely to have Herpes simplex type-2 (HSV-2). However, there was no association between age at menarche and HIV infection. Girls with earlier menarche are more vulnerable to societal expectations to start having sex and to marry. The study also found that the risk of HSV-2 and HIV increased rapidly with age.
The study shows that the luminal domain of GnT1IP-L inhibits N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase MGAT1 and that GnT1IP-L forms homomeric interactions in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and heteromeric interactions with MGAT1 in the Golgi. The study also found that GnT1IP/Mgat4d transcripts are expressed predominantly in spermatocytes and spermatids in mice and reduced in men with impaired spermatogenesis. The specificity of GnT1IP-L for MGAT1 compared to related medial Golgi GlcNAc-transferases, and the interactions of GnT1IP-L in the ER and Golgi were investigated using dynamic fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) and
Researchers investigating the side effects of the melanoma drug vemurafenib have discovered that the drug suppresses apoptosis, a process that can lead to the development of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). The drug, which targets the BRAF gene associated with melanoma, has revolutionised the treatment of the cancer. However, approximately 22% of patients treated with vemurafenib also develop cSCC while undergoing therapy. The drug is known to induce the activation of the protein ERK, resulting in hyperproliferation, but the latest findings indicate that BRAF inhibitors also suppress the JNK protein which is present in several cancers, raising implications for understanding toxicities associated with BRAF inhibitors and for their use in combination therapies. 

